



Internet Engineering Task Force                               A. T. Abak
Internet-Draft                                    Independent Researcher
Intended status: Informational                            30 August 2026
Expires: 3 March 2027


      Evidence Requirements for Agent Control Delivery and Outcome
                             Reconciliation
             draft-abak-agent-control-delivery-evidence-00

Abstract

   Agent systems can issue stop, suspend, revoke, constrain, cancel, or
   override instructions across system and administrative boundaries.  A
   record that such a control was decided or dispatched does not
   establish that the intended enforcement point received or applied it.
   Conversely, the absence of an acknowledgement does not, by itself,
   establish non-delivery.

   This document defines format-independent evidence requirements for
   preserving that distinction.  It separates issuer-side emission,
   receiver-side observation, enforcement outcome, and observation of
   the resulting control effect.  It also defines negative-observation
   rules, per-instruction reconciliation states, and bounded-population
   accounting so that missing, malformed, conflicting, and unmatched
   records remain visible.

   This document does not define a receipt format, wire protocol,
   authorization system, policy language, transparency service, or audit
   regime.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 3 March 2027.




Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.2.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Problem Statement and Failure Model . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  Logical Evidence Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  Issuer-Side Emission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.2.  Receiver-Side Observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.3.  Enforcement Outcome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.4.  Control-Effect Observation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Evidence Preservation Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.1.  R-CD-1: Stable Instruction Identity . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.2.  R-CD-2: Content Binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.3.  R-CD-3: Boundary Attribution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.4.  R-CD-4: Issuer-Side Emission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.5.  R-CD-5: Receiver-Side Observation . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.6.  R-CD-6: Separate Enforcement Outcome  . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.7.  R-CD-7: Separate Control-Effect Observation . . . . . . .  11
     5.8.  R-CD-8: Negative Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.9.  R-CD-9: Time and Ordering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.10. R-CD-10: Total Reconciliation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     5.11. R-CD-11: Bounded-Population Accounting  . . . . . . . . .  12
     5.12. R-CD-12: Resolution Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     5.13. R-CD-13: Scope and Non-Claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     5.14. R-CD-14: Consumption and Fail-Safe Handling . . . . . . .  13
   6.  Reconciliation Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     6.1.  Per-Instruction Delivery Dispositions . . . . . . . . . .  13
     6.2.  Minimum Reconciliation Procedure  . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     6.3.  Population Conservation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     6.4.  Aggregate Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   7.  Protocol Attachment Points  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   8.  Composition with Existing Mechanisms  . . . . . . . . . . . .  16



Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


     8.1.  Native Verification First . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     8.2.  SCITT Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     8.3.  Telemetry and Trace Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   9.  Operational Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     9.1.  Deadlines, Retries, and Late Evidence . . . . . . . . . .  17
     9.2.  Durability and Acknowledgement Point  . . . . . . . . . .  18
     9.3.  Multiple Enforcement Paths  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     10.1.  Substitution, Replay, and Identifier Reuse . . . . . . .  18
     10.2.  Observer and Key Compromise  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     10.3.  Evidence Suppression and Selective Population  . . . . .  19
     10.4.  Availability and Fail-Safe Policy  . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     10.5.  Semantic and Physical-World Gaps . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   11. Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   12. Implementation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   13. Relationship to Adjacent Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   14. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   15. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   16. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   17. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   Illustrative Logical Record Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   Minimum Conformance Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26

1.  Introduction

   Agent communication and execution systems increasingly carry control
   instructions that are expected to constrain a live runtime.  Examples
   include stopping a task, suspending a delegated operation, revoking
   an outstanding grant, cancelling a tool request, forcing a handoff,
   or replacing a permissive policy with a restrictive one.

   These controls frequently cross more than one boundary.  A policy
   component may decide that an activity must stop.  An issuer may
   serialize and dispatch the corresponding instruction.  A broker,
   gateway, sidecar, or operating-system channel may transport it.  An
   enforcement point may receive and verify it.  The enforcement point
   may then apply, refuse, or fail to apply it.  Finally, an observer
   may or may not see the intended control effect.

   Collapsing those events into a single label such as "sent",
   "delivered", "enforced", or "stopped" creates an interoperability and
   security problem.  Two implementations can emit syntactically valid
   records while reaching incompatible conclusions about the same
   control.  A downstream evidence or audit layer cannot reconstruct a
   boundary fact that was never preserved by either side of that
   boundary.




Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   This document therefore specifies the minimum logical facts and
   reconciliation behavior needed to preserve control delivery and
   outcome uncertainty.  The requirements are independent of any
   particular serialization, transport, signature scheme, evidence
   envelope, or transparency system.

1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals

   This document applies when a governance-relevant control instruction
   crosses a system, process, privilege, trust, or administrative
   boundary on its way to an enforcement point.  It covers:

   *  binding issuer-side and receiver-side observations to the same
      control instruction;

   *  distinguishing receipt, enforcement outcome, and observed control
      effect;

   *  preserving positive failures and bounded negative observations;

   *  reconciling missing, malformed, duplicated, substituted, orphaned,
      and conflicting evidence; and

   *  stating the scope and limitations of any resulting claim.

   This document does not:

   *  define a new receipt, token, log-entry, or evidence-envelope
      format;

   *  define how an agent is authenticated or authorized;

   *  decide whether a control instruction is correct, lawful, safe, or
      consistent with policy;

   *  define the semantics of stop, suspend, cancel, revoke, override,
      or any other control verb;

   *  prove the truth of producer assertions, complete mediation, or
      physical-world effect;

   *  require public disclosure of prompts, model reasoning, personal
      data, proprietary policy, or protected content; or

   *  standardize accountability, auditing, retention, or regulatory
      compliance.





Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   A protocol or profile can adopt the requirements in this document
   while using its existing identifiers, errors, acknowledgements,
   signatures, telemetry, or external evidence format.

1.2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   This document is Informational.  The requirement terms make the
   evidence contract testable by protocol authors and implementers; they
   do not define an on-wire protocol by themselves.

2.  Terminology

   Agent Runtime
      A software environment that plans, mediates, dispatches, or
      executes actions on behalf of an agent or an agentic application.

   Control Instruction
      A direction intended to restrict, interrupt, replace, or otherwise
      govern current or future runtime behavior.  Examples include stop,
      suspend, cancel, revoke, constrain, quarantine, handoff, and
      override.  A control instruction is distinct from the business or
      tool action being governed.

   Issuer
      The component that emits a control instruction toward an
      enforcement point.  The issuer need not be the policy decision
      point that caused the instruction to be created.

   Enforcement Point
      The component that can apply or refuse the control at the relevant
      runtime or effect path.

   Control Boundary
      The declared system, process, privilege, trust, or administrative
      boundary between the issuer-side observation and the receiver-side
      observation.

   Observation Record
      An attributable statement that a specified observer saw a
      specified event at a specified boundary and time.  An observation
      record is an assertion whose integrity and trust basis require
      separate evaluation.



Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   Receiver Observation
      An observation made at, or cryptographically bound to, the
      intended enforcement point after the point has read and matched
      the control instruction.  Acceptance by an upstream transport
      intermediary is not a receiver observation unless a profile
      explicitly establishes equivalent endpoint semantics.

   Enforcement Outcome
      The enforcement point's attributable result after processing the
      instruction, such as APPLIED, REFUSED, NO_EFFECT, or UNKNOWN.

   Control Effect
      The change in governed runtime state that the control instruction
      was intended to cause, such as a task entering a stopped state.
      This term does not mean the consequential business effect of the
      action that the agent was attempting to perform.

   Negative Observation
      A positive record of a bounded condition such as a deadline
      passing without a matching acknowledgement, a transport rejecting
      an attempt, or a referenced counterpart remaining unavailable at a
      stated reconciliation cutoff.  It is not a bare absence of data.

   Reconciler
      A component that correlates observations and reports a scoped
      verdict without silently converting uncertainty into success or
      failure.

   Bounded Population
      A closed, reproducible set of instructions or records selected by
      a declared inclusion rule, observation window, and reconciliation
      cutoff.

   Independent Observer
      An observer whose authority and write path are not controlled by
      the party or component whose assertion it is intended to
      corroborate.  Administrative, key, process, and storage separation
      are relevant to this determination.

3.  Problem Statement and Failure Model

   For a given control instruction, the following facts are distinct:

   1.  a governance or policy decision was made;

   2.  a control instruction was constructed and emitted;

   3.  the instruction crossed the last issuer-controlled boundary;



Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   4.  the intended enforcement point received and matched it;

   5.  the enforcement point applied or refused it; and

   6.  the intended control effect was observed.

   Evidence for one item does not, without an explicitly specified and
   verified binding, establish a later item.  In particular, a decision
   record does not establish dispatch; dispatch does not establish
   receipt; receipt does not establish enforcement; and enforcement does
   not establish an observed control effect.

   The reverse inference is also unsafe.  Missing receiver evidence can
   result from non-delivery, delayed delivery, delayed evidence export,
   a failed observer, retention loss, clock disagreement, identifier
   mismatch, or evidence suppression.  A receiver cannot report a
   control it never received.  An issuer cannot, from silence alone,
   prove what happened inside the receiver's boundary.

   The failure model includes at least:

   *  transport rejection, loss, reordering, duplication, and retry;

   *  identifier collision or reuse;

   *  the same identifier carrying a different instruction digest;

   *  a receiver record with no issuer-side counterpart;

   *  malformed or unverifiable records;

   *  conflicting observations from the same or different observers;

   *  partial observer or evidence-store failure;

   *  clock skew and unsupported ordering claims;

   *  an enforcement point acknowledging receipt before persistence or
      processing;

   *  successful processing that produces no observable control effect;
      and

   *  compromise of an issuer, receiver, observer, verifier, or signing
      key.

   The requirements below do not eliminate those failures.  They make
   the distinctions and residual uncertainty interoperably visible.



Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


4.  Logical Evidence Model

   An implementation MAY carry the required facts in one artifact, in
   several artifacts, in protocol fields, in telemetry, or through
   external references.  Regardless of packaging, a consumer needs to
   distinguish the following logical observations.

4.1.  Issuer-Side Emission

   The issuer-side observation records that a particular instruction
   crossed a declared issuer boundary.  It binds a stable instruction
   identifier to a digest of the exact governed instruction or declared
   projection, identifies the target enforcement point or resolution
   input, and attributes the observation to the issuer-side observer.

   Creation of an in-memory object, enqueueing inside the issuer's own
   process, or a policy decision that has not reached the declared
   boundary does not satisfy this observation.

4.2.  Receiver-Side Observation

   The receiver-side observation records that the intended enforcement
   point, or an endpoint-bound observer acting for it, read an
   instruction with the same stable identifier and digest.  The record
   identifies the receiving boundary and the verification or matching
   result.

   A transport-level "accepted" or "queued" response is evidence about
   that transport boundary.  It MUST NOT be labeled as enforcement-point
   receipt unless the applicable profile defines the endpoint binding,
   delivery semantics, persistence point, and failure behavior that make
   the equivalence valid.

4.3.  Enforcement Outcome

   The enforcement outcome reports what the enforcement point did after
   receiving and evaluating the instruction.  At minimum, a profile that
   reports enforcement MUST be able to distinguish:

   APPLIED
      The enforcement point reports that it applied the specified
      control under the declared local semantics.

   REFUSED
      The enforcement point reports that it intentionally did not apply
      the control, with a scoped reason or reason class where disclosure
      policy permits.




Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   NO_EFFECT
      The enforcement point processed the control but reports that it
      caused no change under the declared predicate and observation
      window.

   UNKNOWN
      The enforcement point cannot determine or support one of the
      preceding outcomes.

   APPLIED is an attributable enforcement assertion.  It is not, by
   itself, independent observation of the resulting runtime state.

4.4.  Control-Effect Observation

   A control-effect observation records a scoped predicate over the
   governed runtime state, such as "task X was no longer dispatching
   tool calls during window W".  It identifies the observer, observation
   method, target, predicate, window, and result.

   Where independent corroboration is claimed, the observer MUST be
   independent of both the issuer and the enforcement point under the
   stated trust model.  An implementation MUST NOT infer independence
   from a different process name, service label, or signing key alone.

5.  Evidence Preservation Requirements

5.1.  R-CD-1: Stable Instruction Identity

   Each control instruction crossing a control boundary MUST have an
   identifier that remains stable across issuer, transport, receiver,
   enforcement, and reconciliation observations.  The identifier's
   uniqueness scope and reuse rules MUST be defined.  A decision, task,
   session, action, or delegation reference MAY also be carried, but it
   MUST NOT replace the instruction identifier unless the protocol
   defines identical uniqueness and lifecycle semantics.

5.2.  R-CD-2: Content Binding

   Every observation used to correlate a control instruction MUST bind
   the instruction identifier to a digest of either the exact
   instruction or a declared canonical projection of it.  The
   projection, digest algorithm, canonicalization rule, and domain-
   separation rule, if any, MUST be identified by the applicable
   protocol or profile.

   A digest match establishes byte or projection correspondence under
   the named algorithm.  It does not establish semantic equivalence,
   correctness, authority, or truth.



Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


5.3.  R-CD-3: Boundary Attribution

   Each observation MUST identify the observer, the boundary side
   observed, and the event being asserted.  The evidence profile MUST
   state how the observer identity and its authority are verified.  If
   the producer is able to rewrite the purported corroborating record,
   the record MUST NOT be described as independent evidence.

5.4.  R-CD-4: Issuer-Side Emission

   When an implementation claims that a control was dispatched, it MUST
   emit or preserve an issuer-side observation at the last declared
   issuer-controlled boundary.  The observation MUST include the stable
   identifier, content binding, target or resolution input, observed
   time, and boundary description.

   If emission fails before that boundary, the implementation MUST NOT
   report the instruction as dispatched.  It SHOULD record the failed
   emission attempt as a positive failure event.

5.5.  R-CD-5: Receiver-Side Observation

   An implementation MUST NOT report delivery to the enforcement point
   unless it has a matching receiver-side observation or a receipt whose
   endpoint semantics satisfy Section 4.2.  The observation MUST carry
   the stable identifier, content binding, receiver identity, observed
   time, and verification result.

   A receiver MUST NOT acknowledge a digest or instruction identifier it
   did not read and match.  If verification or content matching fails,
   the receiver SHOULD preserve a scoped failure observation rather than
   emitting a successful acknowledgement.

5.6.  R-CD-6: Separate Enforcement Outcome

   Receipt and enforcement MUST be represented as separate facts.  An
   implementation that reports an enforcement result MUST distinguish at
   least APPLIED, REFUSED, NO_EFFECT, and UNKNOWN, or define a lossless
   mapping from its native states to those meanings.  Missing
   enforcement evidence MUST NOT default to APPLIED.











Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


5.7.  R-CD-7: Separate Control-Effect Observation

   An observed control effect MUST be represented separately from both
   delivery and enforcement.  The observation MUST name its predicate,
   target, method, observer relationship, start and end conditions, and
   result.  A claim that no effect occurred MUST be bounded by an
   observation window and predicate; silence alone MUST NOT be reported
   as NO_EFFECT.

5.8.  R-CD-8: Negative Observations

   A negative observation MUST record what was positively observed, from
   which boundary, and as of which cutoff.  Profiles SHOULD support at
   least the following conceptual conditions where applicable:

   *  deadline elapsed without a matching acknowledgement;

   *  counterpart missing at the reconciliation cutoff;

   *  transport rejected the identified attempt;

   *  verification or content matching failed; and

   *  outcome remained undetermined after the declared deadline.

   The absence of an observation record is not a negative observation.
   A deadline-elapsed record establishes the reconciler's bounded view;
   it does not prove that the receiver never received the instruction.

5.9.  R-CD-9: Time and Ordering

   Each timed observation MUST identify its time value and the relevant
   clock or trust basis.  A profile that reports cross-observer latency
   or precedence MUST state how clock synchronization, trusted
   timestamping, causal linkage, or another ordering mechanism supports
   that claim.

   Matching identifiers and digests establish correspondence.  They do
   not, by themselves, establish that one observation preceded another.
   Unsupported ordering claims MUST be omitted or reported as
   indeterminate.










Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


5.10.  R-CD-10: Total Reconciliation

   A reconciler MUST produce a deterministic disposition for every
   instruction and every input record presented under a declared
   profile.  Malformed, unverifiable, duplicate, conflicting, and
   unmatched records MUST NOT be silently discarded.  A reconciler MUST
   NOT produce a successful delivery verdict solely because no failure
   record exists.

   The minimum per-instruction delivery dispositions are defined in
   Section 6.1.  A profile MAY add more specific states, provided that
   it defines a lossless mapping to the minimum set and does not weaken
   UNCONFIRMED, INVALID, CONFLICT, or INDETERMINATE into success.

5.11.  R-CD-11: Bounded-Population Accounting

   An implementation claiming completeness over a set of controls MUST
   declare a reproducible inclusion rule, observation window,
   reconciliation cutoff, and expected issuer-instruction count.  Each
   expected instruction MUST appear in exactly one per-instruction
   disposition.  Each receiver-side input record MUST also be accounted
   for as matched, orphaned, duplicated, or invalid.

   If the implementation cannot define a closed population, it MUST NOT
   claim complete delivery, complete failure detection, or complete
   reconciliation.  It MAY report per-record results with an explicit
   open population scope.

5.12.  R-CD-12: Resolution Failure

   If a control instruction refers to an external decision, policy,
   action, task, target, key, or evidence binding, the applicable
   protocol or profile MUST define behavior when that reference cannot
   be resolved, is stale, resolves ambiguously, or resolves to
   inconsistent content.  Unresolved or ambiguous bindings MUST NOT be
   treated as verified delivery or successful enforcement.

5.13.  R-CD-13: Scope and Non-Claims

   Evidence producers and reconcilers MUST state what each result covers
   and what it does not cover.  At minimum, integrity, attribution,
   delivery, enforcement, observed control effect, ordering,
   completeness, and independent corroboration MUST NOT be implied
   unless each is separately supported under the declared trust model.







Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   A signature establishes only the properties supported by the verified
   key binding and signature input.  A transparency receipt establishes
   only the registration or inclusion properties supplied by the
   relevant transparency service.  Neither establishes the truth of a
   producer's event assertion by itself.

5.14.  R-CD-14: Consumption and Fail-Safe Handling

   An unacknowledged or unresolved safety-relevant control instruction
   MUST NOT be consumed as delivered.  A relying system SHOULD expose
   UNCONFIRMED, CONFLICT, INVALID, and INDETERMINATE results to
   operational policy and SHOULD define a fail-safe, retry, escalation,
   or human notification behavior appropriate to the controlled risk.

   This document does not select the operational response.  It requires
   that uncertainty remain distinguishable at the point where that local
   response is chosen.

6.  Reconciliation Model

6.1.  Per-Instruction Delivery Dispositions

   A conforming reconciliation profile MUST preserve at least the
   following meanings:

   CONFIRMED
      A receiver-side observation matches the issuer-side instruction
      identifier and content binding under the declared verification
      rules.

   EXPLICIT_FAILURE
      A positive, attributable failure observation applies to the
      identified attempt and boundary.  The result MUST state its scope
      and MUST NOT be generalized to every possible delivery path.

   UNCONFIRMED
      An issuer-side instruction exists, but no matching receiver-side
      observation is available at the reconciliation cutoff.

   SUBSTITUTION
      Issuer-side and receiver-side records use the same instruction
      identifier but different content bindings.

   CONFLICT
      Two or more otherwise applicable records make incompatible
      assertions that the profile cannot deterministically resolve.

   INVALID



Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


      The instruction or a required record is malformed, fails native
      verification, or lacks a required binding.

   INDETERMINATE
      The available inputs do not support a stronger disposition for a
      reason other than ordinary absence of a receiver observation.

   Receiver-side records that have no issuer-side instruction in the
   declared issuer population are ORPHAN records.  Duplicate and invalid
   receiver records are counted separately for record accounting.
   ORPHAN is not an instruction disposition because there is no
   corresponding expected issuer instruction.

   The delivery disposition is independent of the enforcement outcome
   and the control-effect result.  For example, an instruction can have
   delivery CONFIRMED, enforcement APPLIED, and control effect UNKNOWN.

6.2.  Minimum Reconciliation Procedure

   For a declared bounded population, a reconciler:

   1.  freezes the profile revision, trust inputs, inclusion rule,
       observation window, and reconciliation cutoff;

   2.  parses every input record and retains invalid inputs in an error
       population;

   3.  performs each artifact's native integrity, identity, freshness,
       and authorization checks before consuming its claims;

   4.  groups valid records by stable instruction identifier without
       assuming that identifier equality implies content equality;

   5.  compares content bindings and boundary roles;

   6.  assigns exactly one delivery disposition to every expected issuer
       instruction;

   7.  accounts separately for every receiver record as matched,
       orphaned, duplicated, or invalid;

   8.  reports enforcement and control-effect results as separate
       dimensions; and

   9.  emits counts, exclusions, and limitations sufficient for a third
       party to repeat the same structural verdict.





Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   Profile-specific conflict resolution MAY select among duplicate or
   superseding records, but the discarded alternatives and the selection
   rule MUST remain reviewable.

6.3.  Population Conservation

   Let I be the bounded set of expected issuer instructions.  A
   reconciliation report that claims complete instruction accounting
   MUST satisfy:

        |I| = Nconfirmed + Nexplicit_failure + Nunconfirmed
            + Nsubstitution + Nconflict + Ninvalid + Nindeterminate

   Let R be the bounded set of receiver-side input records.  Complete
   receiver-record accounting MUST separately satisfy:

         |R| = Nmatched + Norphan + Nduplicate + Ninvalid_receiver

   The equations describe accounting classes, not wire values or IANA
   registries.  Profiles MAY subdivide a class, but the sum of its
   subdivisions MUST preserve the parent count.  Records excluded before
   population construction MUST be reported with the exclusion rule and
   count; otherwise the completeness claim is not reproducible.

6.4.  Aggregate Results

   A profile MAY define aggregate results such as PASS, FAIL, or
   INCONCLUSIVE.  If it does:

   *  PASS MUST require every expected instruction to meet the profile's
      successful per-instruction conditions;

   *  FAIL MUST identify at least one positive failing condition and
      MUST NOT be inferred solely from missing evidence;

   *  UNCONFIRMED, CONFLICT, INVALID, or INDETERMINATE input MUST
      prevent PASS unless the profile explicitly excludes that input
      before population construction; and

   *  the report MUST publish the complete class counts rather than only
      the aggregate label.










Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


7.  Protocol Attachment Points

   A protocol need not carry an audit receipt to preserve the facts
   needed by an external evidence layer.  When a governance-relevant
   transition crosses a protocol or administrative boundary, the
   protocol or its implementation profile SHOULD provide attachment
   points for:

   *  a stable control-instruction identifier and, where available, a
      stable reference to the upstream decision, action, task, or
      session;

   *  a digest of the exact governed instruction or declared action
      projection;

   *  the issuer and intended enforcement-point identities or resolution
      inputs;

   *  an attributable outcome that preserves deny, defer, reject,
      timeout, unresolved, and indeterminate states;

   *  a way to distinguish transport acceptance from enforcement-point
      receipt;

   *  an explicit rule for stale, missing, ambiguous, or inconsistent
      external references; and

   *  a stable reference through which an external evidence system can
      bind additional observations without changing the protocol's
      native message format.

   These attachment points can be realized as native fields, structured
   errors, acknowledgements, protocol events, or references.  This
   document does not require that evidence artifacts be transferred
   inline.

   In agent communication requirements work, accountability and auditing
   can remain out of scope while these preservation properties remain in
   scope.  The distinction is that this document does not ask the
   protocol to define what an auditor concludes.  It asks the protocol
   boundary not to erase the identifiers, bindings, outcomes, and
   failure semantics that any downstream verifier would need.

8.  Composition with Existing Mechanisms







Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


8.1.  Native Verification First

   Each credential, signature, attestation, authorization result,
   transport acknowledgement, telemetry record, and transparency receipt
   retains its native semantics and verifier.  A reconciler MUST perform
   or consume the result of the native verification before treating the
   artifact as evidence for a control-delivery claim.

   A self-declared algorithm, key identifier, role, or observer label
   MUST NOT drive trust without an externally configured or otherwise
   verified binding.  Composition MUST NOT strengthen the weakest input
   beyond its verified meaning.

8.2.  SCITT Composition

   [RFC9943] defines signed statements and receipts for registration in
   a transparency service.  A control observation or reconciliation
   report can be carried as, or referenced by, a SCITT Signed Statement.
   A SCITT receipt can then provide evidence of the registration
   properties defined by that service.

   SCITT registration does not, by itself, prove that a control was
   delivered, enforced, correctly observed, or true.  Those meanings
   still depend on the observation boundary, native verification,
   content binding, and reconciliation rules defined here and in the
   applicable profile.

8.3.  Telemetry and Trace Composition

   Telemetry systems can carry timestamps, trace identifiers, and
   correlated events.  A trace identifier can help locate related
   records, but trace membership alone does not establish instruction-
   content equality, authority, endpoint receipt, ordering across
   untrusted clocks, or independence.  Profiles using telemetry MUST
   state which required bindings are native, derived, or absent.

9.  Operational Considerations

9.1.  Deadlines, Retries, and Late Evidence

   Deployments SHOULD define acknowledgement and reconciliation
   deadlines based on the controlled risk and transport characteristics.
   The deadline source, start event, units, and clock basis need to be
   explicit.  A late receiver observation can change UNCONFIRMED to
   CONFIRMED in a later reconciliation run, but the earlier report and
   its cutoff SHOULD remain available.





Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   Retries SHOULD reuse or relate identifiers according to a declared
   rule.  Reusing one identifier for different instruction content
   creates SUBSTITUTION, not a retry.  Creating a new identifier for
   every retry without a common attempt-group reference can hide
   repeated delivery failures.

9.2.  Durability and Acknowledgement Point

   A profile SHOULD state whether receiver acknowledgement occurs after
   parsing, verification, durable persistence, admission to an
   enforcement queue, or completed enforcement.  Implementations MUST
   NOT use the same acknowledgement value for several of those points
   unless the profile defines the combined semantics and residual
   failure window.

9.3.  Multiple Enforcement Paths

   A control can be ineffective even when one enforcement point applies
   it if an alternate path remains open.  A deployment claiming complete
   control mediation SHOULD enumerate the paths within scope and
   identify the enforcement point for each path.  This document does not
   prove that the enumeration is complete.

10.  Security Considerations

   The evidence described here is security-relevant because it can drive
   escalation, incident response, or claims that an agent was stopped.
   An attacker can target the instruction, the delivery path, the
   observer, the evidence store, the verifier, or the reconciliation
   population.

10.1.  Substitution, Replay, and Identifier Reuse

   An attacker can reuse an instruction identifier with weaker content,
   replay an old acknowledgement, or correlate a receiver record to the
   wrong attempt.  Stable identifiers, content digests, freshness rules,
   target binding, and attempt-group semantics mitigate these attacks.
   Digest algorithms and canonicalization rules need downgrade-resistant
   selection.

10.2.  Observer and Key Compromise

   A valid signature proves control of a signing key over the signed
   bytes; it does not prove that the observer actually saw the asserted
   event.  Key-to-observer binding, protected key use, process and
   storage separation, attestation where appropriate, and independent
   observation can improve confidence.  None should be overstated as
   ground truth.



Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


10.3.  Evidence Suppression and Selective Population

   A producer can suppress failed controls or choose a favorable subset
   after the fact.  Bounded-population construction, entry-emission
   rules, append-only or transparency mechanisms, and independent
   counters can make suppression more detectable.  An open population
   cannot support a completeness claim.

10.4.  Availability and Fail-Safe Policy

   An attacker can withhold acknowledgements or evidence to force fail-
   safe shutdowns, or flood a reconciler with orphan and invalid
   records.  Implementations need resource limits, authenticated inputs,
   replay control, rate limiting, and a local policy that balances
   safety and availability.  The evidence layer MUST preserve the
   uncertain state even when local policy chooses to continue operation.

10.5.  Semantic and Physical-World Gaps

   Matching digests do not prove that two implementations assign the
   same meaning to a control verb.  An enforcement assertion does not
   prove a physical-world outcome.  Profiles need versioned control
   semantics and scoped effect predicates.  High-consequence deployments
   require domain-specific validation beyond this document.

11.  Privacy Considerations

   Control evidence can reveal agent identities, user relationships,
   incident timing, policy decisions, operational topology, and
   sensitive task state.  Stable identifiers can enable correlation
   across services and observation windows.

   Implementations SHOULD minimize payloads, use scoped or pseudonymous
   identifiers where possible, separate identity resolution from routine
   evidence exchange, apply access controls and retention limits, and
   support selective disclosure.  Raw prompts, chain-of-thought, model
   context, personal data, and proprietary policy SHOULD NOT be included
   by default.

   Publishing a digest instead of content reduces direct disclosure but
   does not eliminate it.  Digests of low-entropy or enumerable values
   can be guessed.  Profiles SHOULD use commitments, nonces, or access-
   controlled references where dictionary attacks are relevant.

   Independent observation increases corroboration but can also increase
   data replication and linkability.  The independence requirement is
   scoped to claims that explicitly need independent corroboration; it
   is not a requirement to disclose every event to an additional party.



Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


12.  Implementation Status

   This section is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   This section records implementation experience available as of 30
   August 2026 and is intended to be removed before publication as an
   RFC.

   The AI Runtime Evidence Protocol (AIREP) [AIREP-REPO] is one
   experimental implementation source for the distinctions in this
   document.  AIREP v0.1 remains its recommended implementation target.
   Its control-delivery profile records issuer, enforcement-point, and
   witness observations and includes a total reconciler.  At repository
   commit 617fa1a1903f1fd10c8e157a95592950aebcfde9, the reference runner
   reproduced the expected verdict and per-instruction status for all 12
   committed control-delivery reconciliation bundles.

   AIREP v0.2.0-alpha.1 [AIREP-V02] is an experimental prerelease.  It
   separates Decision Receipts, Control Evidence, Execution Evidence,
   and Effect Evidence and correlates them through explicit identifiers
   and digests.  Its released artifacts include five JSON Schema files
   -- four artifact-family schemas and one shared definitions schema --
   a 117-fixture two-engine schema-validation corpus, and two separately
   authored first-party class verifiers exercised against a 60-case
   corpus with 15 process probes.  It has no producer implementation, no
   independent third-party producer or audit, and no stable-release
   claim.  It does not supersede v0.1.

   The AIREP artifacts do not establish a deployed end-to-end delivery
   or control-effect claim.  They are cited as implementation and test-
   vector input, not as evidence of broad adoption or IETF consensus.
   The protocol design and its evaluation are described in
   [AIREP-PAPER].

   Additional independently implemented producers, consumers, and
   interoperation results are sought, particularly for paired issuer-
   side and enforcement-point-side evidence across real administrative
   boundaries.

13.  Relationship to Adjacent Work

   The agent communication use-case and requirements work
   [I-D.agentic-ai-usecases-requirements] treats accountability and
   auditing as separate work.  This document is compatible with that
   boundary: it defines only the minimum facts that need to survive
   protocol transitions so an external evidence layer can later bind
   them.




Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   The auditing architecture in [I-D.kuehlewind-audit-architecture]
   links user intent, delegation, authorization, execution, and
   distributed audit records across agent-driven interactions.  This
   document addresses a narrower lifecycle within that architecture:
   evidence that a governance control was emitted, observed at the
   intended enforcement point, processed, and reflected in governed
   runtime state.  It can therefore serve as a specialized control-
   delivery requirements input without replacing the broader audit-
   context and record architecture.

   [I-D.bu-agentproto-security-principal-binding] separates claims,
   carriers, verifiers, bindings, failure behavior, and accepted results
   for agent protocols.  The requirements here specialize that
   discipline for the control-delivery lifecycle and its two boundary
   sides.

   Signed decision records [I-D.bradleyb-audit-decision-records]
   preserve authorization decisions, including denials and non-occurring
   actions, and distinguish correspondence from precedence.  A decision
   record can be an upstream reference for this document.  It does not
   by itself establish that a resulting control instruction reached an
   enforcement point.

   The Action Evidence Boundary [I-D.schrock-action-evidence-boundary]
   defines an executor-side processing model for consequential agent
   effects, including action correlation, local authorization, atomic
   consumption, invocation, effect outcomes, and reconciliation.  This
   document addresses a different direction and object: a governance
   control such as stop or revoke moving toward the component that
   constrains the runtime.  The "control effect" here is the governed
   runtime state, not the consequential business effect of the protected
   action.

   Execution-finality work [I-D.das-agentic-execution-finality]
   distinguishes model tool selection from authorized execution at a
   dispatch-time gate.  A stop or revoke control can target such a gate.
   The present document asks how delivery and enforcement of that
   control are evidenced, rather than how the underlying tool action is
   authorized.

   The SCITT AI-agent receipt profile [I-D.noa-scitt-ai-agent-receipt]
   defines how an action receipt can be registered using SCITT.  This
   document is format-neutral and can supply control-delivery statement
   semantics for a SCITT-based profile without changing SCITT's
   registration semantics.






Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   The OWASP Agentic AI Threats and Mitigations project [OWASP-APTS]
   includes a human-oversight requirement that an unacknowledged kill
   instruction not be treated as delivered.  The requirements and
   negative-observation rules in this document generalize that
   implementation concern into a protocol-independent evidence contract.

14.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

15.  Acknowledgements

   The author thanks participants in the agent2agent, agentproto, and
   SCITT communities whose discussions helped sharpen the distinction
   among decision, delivery, enforcement, and effect.  Specific names
   and review contributions will be added with permission in a later
   revision.

16.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

17.  Informative References

   [AIREP-PAPER]
              Abak, A. T., "AIREP: A Protocol for Per-Decision Evidence
              in AI Runtime Governance", arXiv 2608.21363, August 2026,
              <https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.21363>.

   [AIREP-REPO]
              Abak, A. T., "AI Runtime Evidence Protocol (AIREP):
              Repository Snapshot", Commit
              617fa1a1903f1fd10c8e157a95592950aebcfde9, 27 August 2026,
              <https://github.com/halvrenofviryel/ai-runtime-evidence-
              protocol/tree/617fa1a1903f1fd10c8e157a95592950aebcfde9>.

   [AIREP-V02]
              Abak, A. T., "AI Runtime Evidence Protocol
              v0.2.0-alpha.1", DOI 10.5281/zenodo.22101986, 25 August
              2026, <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.22101986>.




Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 22]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   [I-D.agentic-ai-usecases-requirements]
              Reddy.K, T., Sarker, Z., and K. Yao, "Agentic AI Use Cases
              and Requirements", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-agentic-ai-usecases-requirements-02, 26 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-agentic-ai-
              usecases-requirements/>.

   [I-D.bradleyb-audit-decision-records]
              B, B., "Signed Decision Records for Agent Authorization:
              Disclosures, Entry Emission, and Ordering Evidence", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-bradleyb-audit-
              decision-records-00, 13 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-bradleyb-audit-
              decision-records/>.

   [I-D.bu-agentproto-security-principal-binding]
              Bu, S., "Security Principal and Verifier Binding for Agent
              Communication Protocols", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-bu-agentproto-security-principal-binding-06,
              17 August 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              bu-agentproto-security-principal-binding/>.

   [I-D.das-agentic-execution-finality]
              Das, S., "Tool Selection Is Not Execution: Finality for
              Agentic Tool Dispatch", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-das-agentic-execution-finality-01, 27 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-das-agentic-
              execution-finality/>.

   [I-D.kuehlewind-audit-architecture]
              Kuehlewind, M. and H. Birkholz, "An Architecture for
              Auditing AI Agent Delegation and Interactions", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-kuehlewind-audit-
              architecture-00, 18 May 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-kuehlewind-audit-
              architecture/>.

   [I-D.noa-scitt-ai-agent-receipt]
              Toraman, T., "A SCITT Profile for AI-Agent Action
              Receipts", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-noa-
              scitt-ai-agent-receipt-01, 15 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-noa-scitt-ai-
              agent-receipt/>.








Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 23]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   [I-D.schrock-action-evidence-boundary]
              Schrock, I., "The Action Evidence Boundary for
              Consequential Agent Effects", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-schrock-action-evidence-boundary-04, 16
              August 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              schrock-action-evidence-boundary/>.

   [OWASP-APTS]
              OWASP Foundation, "Agentic AI - Threats and Mitigations:
              Human Oversight", Repository snapshot at commit
              2b210945361bac207f37a21440d0f34c05c07ad9, 2026,
              <https://github.com/OWASP/APTS/
              blob/2b210945361bac207f37a21440d0f34c05c07ad9/
              standard/3_Human_Oversight/README.md>.

   [RFC9943]  Birkholz, H., Delignat-Lavaud, A., Fournet, C., Deshpande,
              Y., and S. Lasker, "An Architecture for Trustworthy and
              Transparent Digital Supply Chains", RFC 9943,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9943, June 2026,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9943>.

Illustrative Logical Record Set

   The following example is deliberately not a wire format.  Field names
   are descriptive placeholders.  Equivalent facts can be carried in
   native protocol messages and external evidence artifacts.

























Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 24]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   {
     "instruction_id": "ctrl-7f3a",
     "instruction_digest": "sha-256:<digest>",
     "decision_ref": "decision-1042",
     "issuer_observation": {
       "boundary": "governor/transport",
       "event": "dispatched",
       "observer": "governor.example",
       "observed_at": "2026-08-27T10:00:00Z"
     },
     "receiver_observation": {
       "boundary": "runtime/enforcement-point",
       "event": "received-and-matched",
       "observer": "ep.example",
       "observed_at": "2026-08-27T10:00:00.120Z"
     },
     "enforcement_outcome": {
       "result": "APPLIED",
       "observer": "ep.example"
     },
     "control_effect": {
       "predicate": "task no longer dispatches tool calls",
       "observer_relationship": "independent",
       "result": "UNKNOWN"
     },
     "scope": {
       "covers": [
         "issuer emission",
         "receiver receipt",
         "EP assertion"
       ],
       "does_not_cover": [
         "independent effect",
         "policy correctness"
       ]
     }
   }

   The example can support delivery CONFIRMED and enforcement APPLIED.
   It cannot support an independently observed control effect because
   that result is UNKNOWN.

Minimum Conformance Cases

   A profile claiming conformance to the reconciliation requirements
   SHOULD publish machine-readable test vectors for at least:

   1.   matching issuer and receiver records: CONFIRMED;



Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 25]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence         August 2026


   2.   issuer record only at cutoff: UNCONFIRMED;

   3.   same identifier and different digest: SUBSTITUTION;

   4.   receiver record only: ORPHAN record accounting;

   5.   positive transport rejection: scoped EXPLICIT_FAILURE;

   6.   malformed issuer record: INVALID, retained in counts;

   7.   malformed receiver record: invalid receiver-record accounting;

   8.   duplicate matching receiver records: one match plus duplicate
        accounting under the profile's rule;

   9.   conflicting valid observations: CONFLICT;

   10.  missing acknowledgement without a negative-observation record:
        UNCONFIRMED, not EXPLICIT_FAILURE;

   11.  deadline-elapsed negative observation followed by late matching
        receipt: versioned reconciliation results preserving both
        cutoffs;

   12.  delivery CONFIRMED with enforcement UNKNOWN;

   13.  enforcement APPLIED with control effect UNKNOWN;

   14.  self-declared observer role without verified binding: no
        independence claim;

   15.  unresolvable external binding: INDETERMINATE or INVALID
        according to the declared profile, never CONFIRMED; and

   16.  a bounded population whose category counts fail conservation:
        aggregate result rejected or INCONCLUSIVE.

Author's Address

   Ali Toygar Abak
   Independent Researcher
   Email: founder@phionyx.ai
   URI:   https://phionyx.ai








Abak                      Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 26]
