



Internet Engineering Task Force                               A. T. Abak
Internet-Draft                                    Independent Researcher
Intended status: Informational                          4 September 2026
Expires: 8 March 2027


      Evidence Requirements for Agent Control Delivery and Outcome
                             Reconciliation
             draft-abak-agent-control-delivery-evidence-01

Abstract

   Agent systems can issue stop, suspend, revoke, constrain, cancel, or
   override instructions across system and administrative boundaries.  A
   record that such a control was decided or dispatched does not
   establish that every intended enforcement point received or applied
   it.  Conversely, the absence of an acknowledgement does not, by
   itself, establish non-delivery.

   This document defines format-independent evidence requirements for
   preserving those distinctions.  It separates issuer-side emission,
   required-target resolution, receiver-side observation, enforcement
   outcome, and observation of the resulting control effect.  For a
   control that must reach more than one enforcement target, the unit of
   delivery reconciliation is an instruction-target obligation rather
   than the parent instruction alone.  The document also defines bounded
   negative observations, total reconciliation, population conservation,
   semantic-preservation requirements for intermediary paths, and a
   separate qualification for the evidentiary strength of aggregate
   claims.

   This document does not define a receipt format, wire protocol,
   authorization system, policy language, transparency service, or audit
   regime.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.







Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 8 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.2.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.  Problem Statement and Failure Model . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.  Logical Evidence Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.1.  Issuer-Side Emission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.2.  Required Target Set and Delivery Obligations  . . . . . .  10
     4.3.  Receiver-Side Observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.4.  Enforcement Outcome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.5.  Control-Effect Observation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   5.  Evidence Preservation Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     5.1.  R-CD-1: Stable Instruction Identity . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     5.2.  R-CD-2: Content Binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     5.3.  R-CD-3: Boundary Attribution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.4.  R-CD-4: Issuer-Side Emission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.5.  R-CD-5: Receiver-Side Observation . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.6.  R-CD-6: Separate Enforcement Outcome  . . . . . . . . . .  14
     5.7.  R-CD-7: Separate Control-Effect Observation . . . . . . .  14
     5.8.  R-CD-8: Negative Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     5.9.  R-CD-9: Time and Ordering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     5.10. R-CD-10: Total Reconciliation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     5.11. R-CD-11: Bounded-Population Accounting  . . . . . . . . .  16
     5.12. R-CD-12: Resolution Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     5.13. R-CD-13: Scope, Qualification, and Non-Claims . . . . . .  17



Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


     5.14. R-CD-14: Consumption and Fail-Safe Handling . . . . . . .  18
     5.15. R-CD-15: Target-Set Closure and Coverage Qualification  .  18
     5.16. R-CD-16: Semantic Preservation Across Intermediaries  . .  19
   6.  Reconciliation Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     6.1.  Per-Obligation Delivery Dispositions  . . . . . . . . . .  19
     6.2.  Parent Instruction Aggregation  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     6.3.  Minimum Reconciliation Procedure  . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     6.4.  Population Conservation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     6.5.  Structural Aggregate Results  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     6.6.  Claim-Support Qualification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   7.  Protocol Attachment Points  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
   8.  Composition with Existing Mechanisms  . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
     8.1.  Native Verification First . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
     8.2.  SCITT Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
     8.3.  Telemetry and Trace Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   9.  Operational Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     9.1.  Deadlines, Retries, and Late Evidence . . . . . . . . . .  27
     9.2.  Durability and Acknowledgement Point  . . . . . . . . . .  27
     9.3.  Multiple Enforcement Paths  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
     9.4.  Control Activation and In-Flight Operations . . . . . . .  28
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
     10.1.  Substitution, Replay, and Identifier Reuse . . . . . . .  29
     10.2.  Observer and Key Compromise  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
     10.3.  Evidence Suppression and Selective Population  . . . . .  29
     10.4.  Availability and Fail-Safe Policy  . . . . . . . . . . .  30
     10.5.  Semantic and Physical-World Gaps . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
   11. Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
   12. Implementation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
   13. Relationship to Adjacent Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
   14. Changes Since -00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
   15. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  36
   16. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  36
   17. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
   18. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
   Illustrative Multi-Target Reconciliation Record . . . . . . . . .  41
   Contributed Freeze-Race Fixture Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . .  42
   Minimum Conformance Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  44
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  46

1.  Introduction

   Agent communication and execution systems increasingly carry control
   instructions that are expected to constrain a live runtime.  Examples
   include stopping a task, suspending a delegated operation, revoking
   an outstanding grant, cancelling a tool request, forcing a handoff,
   or replacing a permissive policy with a restrictive one.





Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   These controls frequently cross more than one boundary.  A policy
   component may decide that an activity must stop.  An issuer may
   serialize and dispatch the corresponding instruction.  A broker,
   gateway, sidecar, or operating-system channel may transport it.  One
   or more enforcement points may receive and verify it.  Each
   enforcement point may then apply, refuse, or fail to apply it.
   Finally, an observer may or may not see the intended control effect.

   Collapsing those events into a single label such as "sent",
   "delivered", "enforced", or "stopped" creates an interoperability and
   security problem.  Two implementations can emit syntactically valid
   records while reaching incompatible conclusions about the same
   control.  A downstream evidence or audit layer cannot reconstruct a
   boundary fact that was never preserved by either side of that
   boundary.

   A second collapse occurs when one control resolves to multiple
   required enforcement targets.  Evidence that target A received the
   control is existential evidence for target A; it is not evidence that
   target B, or every target in a required set, received it.  A third
   collapse occurs when a target set is declared closed for a
   reconciliation run and that declaration is silently promoted into a
   claim that every possible enforcement path in the deployment was
   enumerated.  Those are different facts.

   A fourth collapse can occur after the originating boundary.  A source
   can preserve a governance-relevant distinction correctly while an
   intermediary suppresses, transforms, or collapses it before the
   relying party sees it.  Evidence that a state was preserved at one
   boundary therefore does not establish that the same semantic
   distinction survived intact through the path.

   This document therefore specifies the minimum logical facts and
   reconciliation behavior needed to preserve control delivery and
   outcome uncertainty.  It also separates a structural reconciliation
   result from the support available for a particular attribution,
   completeness, or complete-mediation claim.  The requirements are
   independent of any particular serialization, transport, signature
   scheme, evidence envelope, or transparency system.

1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals

   This document applies when a governance-relevant control instruction
   crosses a system, process, privilege, trust, or administrative
   boundary on its way to one or more enforcement points.  It covers:






Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   *  Binding issuer-side and receiver-side observations to the same
      control instruction and, where applicable, the same delivery
      attempt.

   *  Binding a control to the required target set used for a bounded
      reconciliation run.

   *  Assigning delivery dispositions per instruction-target obligation
      when more than one target is required.

   *  Distinguishing receipt, enforcement outcome, and observed control
      effect.

   *  Preserving positive failures and bounded negative observations.

   *  Reconciling missing, malformed, duplicated, substituted, orphaned,
      conflicting, and indeterminate evidence.

   *  Separating structural reconciliation from the evidentiary
      qualification of a resulting claim.

   *  Preserving governance-relevant outcome distinctions through
      intermediaries, or exposing when a transformation prevents
      lossless preservation from being established.

   *  Stating the scope and limitations of any resulting claim.

   This document does not:

   *  Define a new receipt, token, log-entry, or evidence-envelope
      format.

   *  Define how an agent is authenticated or authorized.

   *  Decide whether a control instruction is correct, lawful, safe, or
      consistent with policy.

   *  Define the semantics of stop, suspend, cancel, revoke, override,
      or any other control verb.

   *  Prove the truth of producer assertions, complete mediation, or
      physical-world effect.

   *  Prove that a declared target set enumerates every possible
      execution or enforcement path unless an applicable profile
      separately establishes that fact.





Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   *  Require public disclosure of prompts, model reasoning, personal
      data, proprietary policy, or protected content.

   *  Standardize accountability, auditing, retention, or regulatory
      compliance.

   A protocol or profile can adopt the requirements in this document
   while using its existing identifiers, errors, acknowledgements,
   signatures, telemetry, or external evidence format.

1.2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   This document is Informational.  The requirement terms make the
   evidence contract testable by protocol authors and implementers; they
   do not define an on-wire protocol by themselves.

2.  Terminology

   Agent Runtime
      A software environment that plans, mediates, dispatches, or
      executes actions on behalf of an agent or an agentic application.

   Control Instruction
      A direction intended to restrict, interrupt, replace, or otherwise
      govern current or future runtime behavior.  Examples include stop,
      suspend, cancel, revoke, constrain, quarantine, handoff, and
      override.  A control instruction is distinct from the business or
      tool action being governed.

   Issuer
      The component that emits a control instruction toward an
      enforcement point.  The issuer need not be the policy decision
      point that caused the instruction to be created.

   Enforcement Point
      A component that can apply or refuse the control at a relevant
      runtime or effect path.

   Control Boundary
      A declared system, process, privilege, trust, or administrative
      boundary between an issuer-side observation and a receiver-side
      observation.



Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   Observation Record
      An attributable statement that a specified observer saw a
      specified event at a specified boundary and time.  An observation
      record is an assertion whose integrity and trust basis require
      separate evaluation.

   Required Target Set
      For one control instruction and one declared reconciliation
      profile, the reproducible set of enforcement targets that are
      required to receive the control.  A target set can be closed for a
      reconciliation run without proving that the set enumerates every
      possible enforcement path in the deployment.

   Delivery Obligation
      The tuple formed by a control instruction or delivery attempt and
      one member of its Required Target Set. It is the minimum unit to
      which a delivery disposition is assigned when target multiplicity
      exists.

   Receiver Observation
      An observation made at, or cryptographically bound to, a
      particular intended enforcement point after that point has read
      and matched the control instruction.  Acceptance by an upstream
      transport intermediary is not a receiver observation unless a
      profile explicitly establishes equivalent endpoint semantics.

   Enforcement Outcome
      The enforcement point's attributable result after processing the
      instruction, such as APPLIED, REFUSED, NO_EFFECT, or UNKNOWN.

   Control Effect
      The change in governed runtime state that the control instruction
      was intended to cause, such as a task entering a stopped state.
      This term does not mean the consequential business or physical
      effect of the action that the agent was attempting to perform.

   Negative Observation
      A positive record of a bounded condition such as a deadline
      passing without a matching acknowledgement, a transport rejecting
      an attempt, or a referenced counterpart remaining unavailable at a
      stated reconciliation cutoff.  It is not a bare absence of data.

   Reconciler
      A component that correlates observations and reports scoped
      dispositions and aggregate results without silently converting
      uncertainty into success or failure.

   Bounded Population



Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


      A closed, reproducible set of delivery obligations or input
      records selected by declared inclusion, target-resolution,
      observation-window, and reconciliation-cutoff rules.

   Structural Reconciliation Result
      An aggregate result, such as PASS, FAIL, or INCONCLUSIVE, derived
      from the declared population and reconciliation rules.  It does
      not by itself state the evidentiary strength of every attribution,
      completeness, or mediation claim.

   Claim Support
      The separately reported strength with which the available verified
      evidence supports a particular scoped claim.  Section 6.6 defines
      the conceptual values FULLY_SUPPORTED, CONDITIONALLY_SUPPORTED,
      and NOT_SUPPORTED.

   Independent Observer
      An observer whose authority and write path are not controlled by
      the party or component whose assertion it is intended to
      corroborate.  Administrative, key, process, and storage separation
      are relevant to this determination.

3.  Problem Statement and Failure Model

   For a given control instruction and one required target, the
   following facts are distinct:

   1.  a governance or policy decision was made;

   2.  a control instruction was constructed and emitted;

   3.  the instruction crossed the last issuer-controlled boundary;

   4.  the target was resolved as a required enforcement point under the
       declared profile;

   5.  that enforcement point received and matched the instruction;

   6.  that enforcement point applied or refused it; and

   7.  the intended control effect was observed.

   Evidence for one item does not, without an explicitly specified and
   verified binding, establish a later item.  In particular, a decision
   record does not establish dispatch; dispatch does not establish
   receipt; receipt does not establish enforcement; and enforcement does
   not establish an observed control effect.




Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   When an instruction has multiple required targets, the facts from
   target A do not establish the corresponding facts for target B.  A
   parent-instruction claim must therefore be derived from the
   dispositions of all required instruction-target obligations rather
   than from the existence of any one receiver record.

   The reverse inference is also unsafe.  Missing receiver evidence can
   result from non-delivery, delayed delivery, delayed evidence export,
   a failed observer, retention loss, clock disagreement, identifier
   mismatch, target-resolution failure, or evidence suppression.  A
   receiver cannot report a control it never received.  An issuer
   cannot, from silence alone, prove what happened inside the receiver's
   boundary.

   Control activation is also not retroactive.  A later APPLIED control
   result does not retroactively relabel a boundary transition that
   occurred before the control took effect.  An operation that crossed
   one earlier admission, provider-entry, or other profile-defined
   effect boundary can nevertheless remain subject to a later applicable
   enforcement boundary.  Evidence of a later refusal does not rewrite
   the earlier transition and does not by itself prove that any prior
   external effect was reversed.  That operation's outcome requires its
   own authenticated reconciliation.

   The failure model includes at least:

   *  transport rejection, loss, reordering, duplication, and retry;

   *  identifier collision or reuse;

   *  the same identifier carrying a different instruction digest;

   *  a receiver record with no issuer-side counterpart;

   *  a required target omitted from, added to, or ambiguously resolved
      within the target population;

   *  a target set declared closed without an accepted basis for a
      stronger complete-mediation claim;

   *  malformed or unverifiable records;

   *  conflicting observations from the same or different observers;

   *  partial observer or evidence-store failure;

   *  clock skew and unsupported ordering claims;




Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   *  an enforcement point acknowledging receipt before persistence or
      processing;

   *  successful processing that produces no observable control effect;

   *  an operation already consumed or in flight when a later control
      becomes effective;

   *  an intermediary that suppresses, transforms, or collapses a
      governance-relevant disposition before it reaches the relying
      party; and

   *  compromise of an issuer, receiver, observer, verifier, or signing
      key.

   The requirements below do not eliminate those failures.  They make
   the distinctions and residual uncertainty interoperably visible.

4.  Logical Evidence Model

   An implementation MAY carry the required facts in one artifact, in
   several artifacts, in protocol fields, in telemetry, or through
   external references.  Regardless of packaging, a consumer needs to
   distinguish the following logical observations and bindings.

4.1.  Issuer-Side Emission

   The issuer-side observation records that a particular instruction
   crossed a declared issuer boundary.  It binds a stable instruction
   identifier to a digest of the exact governed instruction or declared
   projection, identifies the target, Required Target Set, or target-
   resolution input, and attributes the observation to the issuer-side
   observer.

   Creation of an in-memory object, enqueueing inside the issuer's own
   process, or a policy decision that has not reached the declared
   boundary does not satisfy this observation.

4.2.  Required Target Set and Delivery Obligations

   For a bounded reconciliation run, each instruction resolves to one or
   more required enforcement targets under a profile-defined rule.  The
   result is the Required Target Set for that instruction.  The set, or
   a verifiable reference that resolves to it, is frozen for the
   reconciliation cutoff before receiver evidence is used to decide
   which targets were expected.





Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   Each member of the Required Target Set creates one Delivery
   Obligation.  A receiver observation for one obligation cannot satisfy
   another obligation merely because both obligations share the same
   parent instruction identifier or content digest.

   A target set that is closed for a reconciliation run establishes the
   population over which structural accounting can be repeated.  It does
   not, by that fact alone, establish that every possible enforcement
   path in the deployment has been enumerated.  A claim of complete
   mediation requires a separately stated and verified coverage basis
   under the declared deployment scope.

4.3.  Receiver-Side Observation

   The receiver-side observation records that a particular intended
   enforcement point, or an endpoint-bound observer acting for it, read
   an instruction with the same stable identifier and content binding.
   The record identifies the required target identity, receiving
   boundary, and verification or matching result.

   A transport-level "accepted" or "queued" response is evidence about
   that transport boundary.  It MUST NOT be labeled as enforcement-point
   receipt unless the applicable profile defines the endpoint binding,
   delivery semantics, persistence point, and failure behavior that make
   the equivalence valid.

4.4.  Enforcement Outcome

   The enforcement outcome reports what one enforcement point did after
   receiving and evaluating the instruction.  At minimum, a profile that
   reports enforcement MUST be able to distinguish:

   APPLIED
      The enforcement point reports that it applied the specified
      control under the declared local semantics and effective boundary.

   REFUSED
      The enforcement point reports that it intentionally did not apply
      the control, with a scoped reason or reason class where disclosure
      policy permits.

   NO_EFFECT
      The enforcement point processed the control but reports that it
      caused no change under the declared predicate and observation
      window.

   UNKNOWN




Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


      The enforcement point cannot determine or support one of the
      preceding outcomes.

   APPLIED is an attributable enforcement assertion for that enforcement
   point.  It is not, by itself, independent observation of the
   resulting runtime state, proof that another required target applied
   the control, or proof that an earlier in-flight operation was
   reversed.

4.5.  Control-Effect Observation

   A control-effect observation records a scoped predicate over the
   governed runtime state, such as "task X was no longer dispatching
   tool calls during window W" or "operation O2 did not cross provider
   entry during window W".  It identifies the observer, observation
   method, target, predicate, window, and result.

   Where independent corroboration is claimed, the observer MUST be
   independent of both the issuer and the enforcement point under the
   stated trust model.  An implementation MUST NOT infer independence
   from a different process name, service label, or signing key alone.
   A scoped effect observation for one target or one operation MUST NOT
   be generalized to every target or every dispatch path.

5.  Evidence Preservation Requirements

5.1.  R-CD-1: Stable Instruction Identity

   Each control instruction crossing a control boundary MUST have an
   identifier that remains stable across issuer, transport, receiver,
   enforcement, and reconciliation observations.  The identifier's
   uniqueness scope and reuse rules MUST be defined.  A decision, task,
   session, action, or delegation reference MAY also be carried, but it
   MUST NOT replace the instruction identifier unless the protocol
   defines identical uniqueness and lifecycle semantics.

   If retries create distinct delivery attempts, the profile MUST define
   an attempt identifier or equivalent rule that prevents observations
   from different attempts from being silently merged.

5.2.  R-CD-2: Content Binding

   Every observation used to correlate a control instruction MUST bind
   the instruction identifier to a digest of either the exact
   instruction or a declared canonical projection of it.  The
   projection, digest algorithm, canonicalization rule, and domain-
   separation rule, if any, MUST be identified by the applicable
   protocol or profile.



Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   A digest match establishes byte or projection correspondence under
   the named algorithm.  It does not establish semantic equivalence,
   correctness, authority, or truth.

5.3.  R-CD-3: Boundary Attribution

   Each observation MUST identify the observer, the boundary side
   observed, and the event being asserted.  The evidence profile MUST
   state how the observer identity and its authority are verified.  If
   the producer is able to rewrite the purported corroborating record,
   the record MUST NOT be described as independent evidence.

   If a profile permits structural processing when an external trust or
   authority binding is absent, it MUST expose that limitation through
   the claim-support qualification defined in Section 6.6.  A self-
   declared key, role, or observer label MUST NOT silently become fully
   supported attribution.

5.4.  R-CD-4: Issuer-Side Emission

   When an implementation claims that a control was dispatched, it MUST
   emit or preserve an issuer-side observation at the last declared
   issuer-controlled boundary.  The observation MUST include the stable
   identifier, content binding, target, target-set reference, or
   resolution input, observed time, and boundary description.

   Where one instruction resolves to multiple required targets, the
   profile MUST preserve a stable binding to the Required Target Set, or
   to a verifiable resolution rule and inputs from which the same set
   can be reconstructed at the reconciliation cutoff.

   If emission fails before that boundary, the implementation MUST NOT
   report the instruction as dispatched.  It SHOULD record the failed
   emission attempt as a positive failure event.

5.5.  R-CD-5: Receiver-Side Observation

   An implementation MUST NOT report delivery to a required target
   unless it has a matching receiver-side observation or a receipt whose
   endpoint semantics satisfy Section 4.3.  The observation MUST carry
   the stable identifier, content binding, receiver identity, required
   target identity, receiving boundary, observed time, verification
   result, and an attempt identifier or equivalent retry binding where
   the profile distinguishes delivery attempts.







Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   A receiver observation MAY satisfy only the Delivery Obligation whose
   target identity and boundary it is verified to represent.  An
   observation for target A MUST NOT be used to confirm target B merely
   because the parent instruction identifier and content digest match.

   A receiver MUST NOT acknowledge a digest or instruction identifier it
   did not read and match.  If verification or content matching fails,
   the receiver SHOULD preserve a scoped failure observation rather than
   emitting a successful acknowledgement.

5.6.  R-CD-6: Separate Enforcement Outcome

   Receipt and enforcement MUST be represented as separate facts.  An
   implementation that reports an enforcement result MUST distinguish at
   least APPLIED, REFUSED, NO_EFFECT, and UNKNOWN, or define a lossless
   mapping from its native states to those meanings.  Missing
   enforcement evidence MUST NOT default to APPLIED.

5.7.  R-CD-7: Separate Control-Effect Observation

   An observed control effect MUST be represented separately from both
   delivery and enforcement.  The observation MUST name its predicate,
   target, method, observer relationship, start and end conditions, and
   result.  A claim that no effect occurred MUST be bounded by an
   observation window and predicate; silence alone MUST NOT be reported
   as NO_EFFECT.

5.8.  R-CD-8: Negative Observations

   A negative observation MUST record what was positively observed, from
   which boundary, and as of which cutoff.  Profiles SHOULD support at
   least the following conceptual conditions where applicable:

   *  deadline elapsed without a matching acknowledgement;

   *  counterpart missing at the reconciliation cutoff;

   *  transport rejected the identified attempt;

   *  verification or content matching failed; and

   *  outcome remained undetermined after the declared deadline.

   The absence of an observation record is not a negative observation.
   A deadline-elapsed record establishes the reconciler's bounded view;
   it does not prove that the receiver never received the instruction.





Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


5.9.  R-CD-9: Time and Ordering

   Each timed observation MUST identify its time value and the relevant
   clock or trust basis.  A profile that reports cross-observer latency
   or precedence MUST state how clock synchronization, trusted
   timestamping, causal linkage, or another ordering mechanism supports
   that claim.

   Matching identifiers and digests establish correspondence.  They do
   not, by themselves, establish that one observation preceded another.
   Unsupported ordering claims MUST be omitted or reported as
   indeterminate.

5.10.  R-CD-10: Total Reconciliation

   A reconciler MUST produce a deterministic disposition for every
   Delivery Obligation and every input record presented under a declared
   profile.  Malformed, unverifiable, duplicate, conflicting, and
   unmatched records MUST NOT be silently discarded.  A reconciler MUST
   NOT produce a successful delivery verdict solely because no failure
   record exists.

   The expected obligation population MUST be constructed from the
   declared issuer-side inclusion and target-resolution rules rather
   than solely from the receiver evidence that happens to be present.
   Otherwise omitted targets or suppressed failures can disappear before
   reconciliation begins.

   The minimum per-obligation delivery dispositions are defined in
   Section 6.1.  A profile MAY add more specific states, provided that
   it defines a lossless mapping to the minimum set and does not weaken
   UNCONFIRMED, INVALID, CONFLICT, or INDETERMINATE into success.

   If several applicable observations or diagnostics are reduced to one
   primary per-obligation disposition, the reduction rule MUST be
   deterministic and reviewable.  All applicable diagnostics, including
   diagnostics not selected as the primary disposition-driving
   diagnostic, MUST remain visible in the report or in an explicitly
   linked diagnostic collection.  This document does not prescribe a
   universal precedence ordering among profile-specific diagnostics.











Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


5.11.  R-CD-11: Bounded-Population Accounting

   An implementation claiming completeness over a set of controls MUST
   declare a reproducible issuer inclusion rule, Required Target Set or
   target-resolution rule for each instruction, observation window,
   reconciliation cutoff, and expected population counts.  Each expected
   Delivery Obligation MUST appear in exactly one per-obligation
   disposition.  Each receiver-side input record MUST also be accounted
   for as matched, orphaned, duplicated, conflicting where the profile
   uses a separate record class, or invalid.

   Every instruction in the bounded issuer population MUST remain
   accounted for during target-set construction, including an
   instruction whose target resolution succeeds and yields an empty
   Required Target Set. Where the Required Target Set for an instruction
   is empty, the instruction MUST remain in the report, the report MUST
   state that the instruction contributed zero Delivery Obligations, and
   the report MUST state the rule or condition under which target
   resolution produced the empty set.  An instruction MUST NOT disappear
   from reconciliation solely because no Delivery Obligation tuple was
   added for it.  The report MUST publish |I| alongside |O| and MUST
   publish counts sufficient to distinguish instructions that
   contributed one or more Delivery Obligations from instructions that
   contributed zero, as required by Section 6.4.

   A profile MUST define whether an empty Required Target Set is a valid
   terminal resolution.  Where the profile declared that semantics
   before reconciliation, an empty set is a legitimate terminal
   resolution and the instruction is still accounted for as a zero-
   obligation instruction.  Where the profile does not permit it, an
   empty Required Target Set MUST prevent a structural PASS for the
   affected instruction and for any parent or aggregate scope that
   depends on it.  An empty Required Target Set MUST NOT be recorded by
   inventing a synthetic enforcement target or a synthetic Delivery
   Obligation, and MUST NOT be classified as EXPLICIT_FAILURE unless a
   positive, attributable failing condition applies under Section 6.1.

   If the implementation cannot define a closed Required Target Set for
   an instruction, it MUST NOT claim complete delivery for that
   instruction over an unspecified target population.  It MAY report
   per-record or per-known-target results with an explicit open-
   population scope.









Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   Closing a target population for reconciliation is not equivalent to
   proving complete mediation.  A report MAY state that every member of
   a declared target set is confirmed when the evidence supports that
   scoped statement; it MUST NOT promote that statement into "every
   possible enforcement path was covered" unless the target-set coverage
   basis separately supports that stronger claim.

5.12.  R-CD-12: Resolution Failure

   If a control instruction refers to an external decision, policy,
   action, task, target, target set, key, or evidence binding, the
   applicable protocol or profile MUST define behavior when that
   reference cannot be resolved, is stale, resolves ambiguously, or
   resolves to inconsistent content.  Unresolved or ambiguous bindings
   MUST NOT be treated as verified delivery or successful enforcement.

5.13.  R-CD-13: Scope, Qualification, and Non-Claims

   Evidence producers and reconcilers MUST state what each result covers
   and what it does not cover.  At minimum, integrity, attribution,
   delivery, enforcement, observed control effect, ordering, population
   closure, complete mediation, and independent corroboration MUST NOT
   be implied unless each is separately supported under the declared
   trust model.

   Where an aggregate result is used to support a relying-party claim,
   the report MUST identify the claim scope and MUST expose the claim-
   support qualification defined in Section 6.6.  A structural PASS MUST
   NOT be rendered or consumed as an unqualified end-to-end success
   statement when attribution, target-set coverage, ordering,
   independence, or another claim predicate remains only declared,
   unverified, or indeterminate.  The co-exposure rule in Section 6.6
   applies to every representation in which a structural aggregate
   result is exposed, not only to the representation in which that
   result was first derived.

   Evidence that a governance-relevant distinction was preserved at one
   boundary MUST NOT, by itself, be consumed as evidence that the
   distinction survived unchanged through later intermediaries to the
   relying party.  Likewise, preservation at an origin boundary does not
   by itself establish downstream receipt or enforcement, an observed
   effect, completeness, or that an unrecorded event did not occur.

   A signature establishes only the properties supported by the verified
   key binding and signature input.  A transparency receipt establishes
   only the registration or inclusion properties supplied by the
   relevant transparency service.  Neither establishes the truth of a
   producer's event assertion by itself.



Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


5.14.  R-CD-14: Consumption and Fail-Safe Handling

   An unacknowledged or unresolved safety-relevant Delivery Obligation
   MUST NOT be consumed as delivered.  A relying system SHOULD expose
   UNCONFIRMED, CONFLICT, INVALID, and INDETERMINATE results to
   operational policy and SHOULD define a fail-safe, retry, escalation,
   or human notification behavior appropriate to the controlled risk.

   This document does not select the operational response.  It requires
   that uncertainty remain distinguishable at the point where that local
   response is chosen.

5.15.  R-CD-15: Target-Set Closure and Coverage Qualification

   For each Required Target Set used in a bounded reconciliation, the
   profile MUST state the set identifier or reproducible resolution rule
   and the basis on which the set is treated as closed.  The report MUST
   also state whether the completeness of that enumeration for a
   stronger deployment-level mediation claim is verified under the trust
   model, merely declared by a source, or indeterminate.

   A profile MAY use different vocabulary, but it MUST preserve the
   distinction among at least the following conceptual conditions:

   VERIFIED
      The relying party accepts evidence, under the declared trust model
      and scope, that the target set covers the enforcement paths
      required by the claim.

   DECLARED_ONLY
      A producer or configuration declares the set closed, so structural
      reconciliation can use it, but the relying party lacks accepted
      evidence for the stronger enumeration-completeness claim.

   INDETERMINATE
      The verifier cannot determine whether the set is complete for the
      requested claim scope.

   A DECLARED_ONLY target set can still support reproducible structural
   accounting over its named members.  It MUST NOT, by itself, support a
   fully qualified claim of complete mediation across every relevant
   path.  The claim-support rules in Section 6.6 determine whether the
   requested claim is conditionally supported or not supported.








Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


5.16.  R-CD-16: Semantic Preservation Across Intermediaries

   When a profile claims that a source-attributable disposition,
   outcome, target identity, or other governance-relevant state is
   preserved across one or more protocol intermediaries, the evidence
   available to the relying party MUST preserve enough source and
   transformation information to determine whether the relevant
   distinction survived the path.  Where a gateway, broker, adapter, or
   other intermediary transforms the native representation, the
   applicable profile MUST define a lossless mapping for every
   governance-relevant state used by the claim or MUST expose that the
   mapping is incomplete, ambiguous, or unavailable.

   An intermediary MUST NOT silently collapse distinct applicable states
   such as deny, defer, reject, timeout, unresolved, or indeterminate
   into a representation that a relying party can consume as a stronger
   or different state.  If lossless preservation cannot be established,
   the resulting state MUST remain explicitly qualified or INDETERMINATE
   according to the profile.

   This requirement concerns preservation of meaning, not a mandated
   carrier.  Native fields, structured errors, acknowledgements, events,
   or references can satisfy it.  It does not require every intermediary
   to emit a new evidence artifact.

6.  Reconciliation Model

6.1.  Per-Obligation Delivery Dispositions

   A conforming reconciliation profile MUST preserve at least the
   following meanings:

   CONFIRMED
      A receiver-side observation matches the Delivery Obligation's
      instruction identifier, attempt binding where applicable, content
      binding, required target identity, and required receiving boundary
      under the declared verification rules.

   EXPLICIT_FAILURE
      A positive, attributable failure observation applies to the
      identified delivery attempt, target, and boundary.  The result
      MUST state its scope and MUST NOT be generalized to other targets
      or delivery paths.

   UNCONFIRMED
      An expected Delivery Obligation exists, but no matching receiver-
      side observation is available at the reconciliation cutoff.




Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   SUBSTITUTION
      Applicable issuer-side and receiver-side records address the same
      Delivery Obligation but carry different content bindings.

   CONFLICT
      Two or more otherwise applicable records make incompatible
      assertions that the profile cannot deterministically resolve.

   INVALID
      The instruction, obligation, or a required record is malformed,
      fails native verification, or lacks a binding that the profile
      requires for structural validity.

   INDETERMINATE
      The available inputs do not support a stronger disposition for a
      reason other than ordinary absence of a receiver observation,
      including an unresolved required target or trust binding.

   Receiver-side records that match no expected Delivery Obligation in
   the declared population are ORPHAN records.  Duplicate and invalid
   receiver records are counted separately for record accounting.
   ORPHAN is not an obligation disposition because there is no
   corresponding expected obligation.

   The delivery disposition is independent of the enforcement outcome
   and the control-effect result.  For example, one obligation can have
   delivery CONFIRMED, enforcement APPLIED, and control effect UNKNOWN
   while another obligation for the same parent instruction remains
   UNCONFIRMED.

6.2.  Parent Instruction Aggregation

   A parent instruction that has one or more required targets can be
   reported as fully confirmed within its declared Required Target Set
   only when every Delivery Obligation for that instruction is
   CONFIRMED.  The report MUST retain the per-target dispositions used
   to derive that parent result.

   If any required obligation is EXPLICIT_FAILURE, UNCONFIRMED,
   SUBSTITUTION, CONFLICT, INVALID, or INDETERMINATE, the parent
   instruction MUST NOT be reported as fully confirmed.  The parent
   result is scoped to the identified target set and does not, by
   itself, establish complete mediation over paths not proven to be in
   that set.







Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


6.3.  Minimum Reconciliation Procedure

   For a declared bounded population, a reconciler:

   1.   freezes the profile revision, trust inputs, issuer inclusion
        rule, target-resolution rules or target-set references, target-
        set closure evidence, observation window, and reconciliation
        cutoff;

   2.   constructs the expected Delivery Obligation population before
        using receiver evidence to decide which targets count as
        expected;

   3.   parses every input record and retains invalid inputs in an error
        population;

   4.   performs each artifact's native integrity, identity, freshness,
        and authorization checks before consuming its claims;

   5.   groups valid records by Delivery Obligation identity without
        assuming that identifier equality implies content, target, or
        attempt equality;

   6.   compares content bindings, target identities, target boundaries,
        and boundary roles;

   7.   assigns exactly one delivery disposition to every expected
        Delivery Obligation;

   8.   accounts separately for every receiver record as matched,
        orphaned, duplicated, conflicting where separately tracked, or
        invalid;

   9.   reports enforcement and control-effect results as separate
        dimensions;

   10.  derives any parent-instruction result only from the complete set
        of required obligation dispositions;

   11.  derives any structural aggregate result under Section 6.5 and
        preserves it separately from claim support;

   12.  emits counts, exclusions, claim scope, claim-support
        qualification, and limitations sufficient for a third party to
        repeat the same structural verdict and understand what stronger
        claims remain unsupported.





Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   Profile-specific conflict resolution MAY select among duplicate or
   superseding records, but the discarded alternatives and the selection
   rule MUST remain reviewable.

6.4.  Population Conservation

   Let I be the bounded set of expected issuer instructions.  For each
   instruction i, let T_i be its closed Required Target Set under the
   declared reconciliation profile.  Let O be the resulting set of
   Delivery Obligations:

                    O = { (i,t) : i in I and t in T_i }

   A reconciliation report that claims complete obligation accounting
   MUST satisfy:

        |O| = Nconfirmed + Nexplicit_failure + Nunconfirmed
            + Nsubstitution + Nconflict + Ninvalid + Nindeterminate

   T_i MAY be empty when the declared target-resolution rule terminates
   with no required enforcement target for instruction i.  Such an
   instruction contributes no Delivery Obligation to O, so obligation
   accounting alone cannot demonstrate that it was considered.  A report
   that claims complete accounting MUST therefore also publish |I| and
   MUST satisfy the separate instruction-level conservation equation:

   |I| = Ninstructions_with_obligations + Nzero_obligation_instructions

   Ninstructions_with_obligations counts the instructions in I whose
   Required Target Set has at least one member.
   Nzero_obligation_instructions counts the instructions in I whose
   target resolution terminated with zero members.  Each zero-obligation
   instruction MUST be reported individually with the rule or condition
   that produced the empty set, as required by Section 5.11.  The two
   equations are independent: |I| accounts for issuer instructions
   and |O| accounts for Delivery Obligations, and neither substitutes
   for the other.

   Let R be the bounded set of receiver-side input records.  Complete
   receiver-record accounting MUST separately satisfy:

         |R| = Nmatched + Norphan + Nduplicate + Ninvalid_receiver

   Profiles MAY retain additional record-side classes, including a
   distinct conflict class, provided that every input record remains
   accounted for exactly once under a published conservation equation.





Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 22]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   The equations describe accounting classes, not wire values or IANA
   registries.  Profiles MAY subdivide a class, but the sum of its
   subdivisions MUST preserve the parent count.  Records or targets
   excluded before population construction MUST be reported with the
   exclusion rule and count; otherwise the completeness claim is not
   reproducible.

6.5.  Structural Aggregate Results

   A profile MAY define a structural aggregate result such as PASS,
   FAIL, or INCONCLUSIVE.  This result answers whether the declared
   population reconciled under the profile's structural rules.  It does
   not, by itself, answer whether a stronger attribution, complete-
   mediation, independence, or physical-effect claim is fully supported.

   If a profile defines these aggregate results:

   *  PASS MUST require a closed obligation population, successful
      population conservation, and every expected Delivery Obligation to
      meet the profile's successful structural conditions;

   *  FAIL MUST identify at least one positive failing condition and
      MUST NOT be inferred solely from missing evidence;

   *  UNCONFIRMED, CONFLICT, INVALID, or INDETERMINATE obligation input
      MUST prevent PASS unless the profile explicitly excluded that
      obligation before population construction under a published rule;

   *  a population-conservation failure MUST prevent PASS; and

   *  the report MUST publish the complete class counts rather than only
      the aggregate label.

   A structural PASS can coexist with CONDITIONALLY_SUPPORTED claim
   support when, for example, every declared obligation reconciles but a
   trust root or independent population-coverage predicate required by a
   stronger relying-party claim was not verified.  Implementations MUST
   NOT collapse those two dimensions into a bare PASS.

6.6.  Claim-Support Qualification

   For each aggregate claim exposed to a relying party, a report MUST
   identify the claim scope, including the target set or population,
   relevant boundaries, observation window or cutoff, and the fact being
   claimed.  The report MUST then preserve a claim-support qualification
   separate from the structural result.





Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 23]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   Wherever a structural aggregate result is rendered, returned,
   exported, or otherwise exposed to a relying party, the corresponding
   claim scope and claim-support qualification MUST be exposed in the
   same result context.  This applies to PASS, FAIL, and INCONCLUSIVE
   alike.  A profile MUST NOT expose a bare structural result that can
   be consumed as the complete result without that qualification.  The
   requirement constrains what accompanies the result, not the field
   layout of any particular serialization: native fields, a nested
   object, a structured error, a protocol event, or a resolvable
   reference can satisfy it, provided that a consumer of that result
   context cannot obtain the structural result without also obtaining
   its claim scope and claim-support qualification.

   A profile MAY use different vocabulary, but it MUST define a lossless
   mapping to at least the following conceptual meanings:

   FULLY_SUPPORTED
      Every evidence predicate required by the scoped claim is satisfied
      under the declared verification and trust rules.  This value does
      not claim ground truth beyond those predicates.

   CONDITIONALLY_SUPPORTED
      The structural result can be stated, but one or more predicates
      required for the stronger claim are declared-only, unverified, not
      independently established, or otherwise limited.  The report MUST
      name each condition or missing predicate.

   NOT_SUPPORTED
      The structural result, population scope, or available evidence
      does not support the requested claim.  The claim MUST NOT be
      rendered as true.

   The structural result and claim support are orthogonal.  A positive
   failure can be strongly evidenced; a structurally balanced or passing
   population can have conditional attribution; and a structurally
   complete result over a declared closed target set can still fail to
   fully support a claim that every possible enforcement path in a
   deployment was covered.

   Profiles MUST state which missing predicates may produce
   CONDITIONALLY_SUPPORTED rather than NOT_SUPPORTED.  They MUST NOT use
   conditional support as a silent fallback for a predicate that the
   profile declares mandatory for the requested claim.








Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 24]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


7.  Protocol Attachment Points

   A protocol need not carry an audit receipt to preserve the facts
   needed by an external evidence layer.  When a governance-relevant
   transition crosses a protocol or administrative boundary, the
   protocol or its implementation profile SHOULD provide attachment
   points for:

   *  a stable control-instruction identifier and, where available, a
      stable delivery-attempt reference and a reference to the upstream
      decision, action, task, or session;

   *  a digest of the exact governed instruction or declared action
      projection;

   *  a target identity or a stable Required Target Set / target-
      resolution reference;

   *  the issuer and intended enforcement-point identities or resolution
      inputs;

   *  an attributable outcome that preserves deny, defer, reject,
      timeout, unresolved, and indeterminate states;

   *  a way to distinguish transport acceptance from target-bound
      enforcement-point receipt;

   *  an explicit rule for stale, missing, ambiguous, or inconsistent
      external references; and

   *  a stable reference through which an external evidence system can
      bind additional observations without changing the protocol's
      native message format.

   These attachment points can be realized as native fields, structured
   errors, acknowledgements, protocol events, or references.  This
   document does not require that evidence artifacts be transferred
   inline.

   Where those facts traverse an intermediary, preservation at the
   originating boundary alone is not sufficient for a claim that the
   relying party received the same distinction.  A protocol or profile
   that maps native states through an intermediary SHOULD preserve
   source attribution and lossless distinguishability; if it cannot, the
   mapping and resulting uncertainty need to remain visible under
   Section 5.16.





Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 25]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   Public AgentProto requirements discussion [AGENTPROTO-PRESERVATION]
   [AGENTPROTO-PRESERVATION-PATH] has drawn the same scope boundary:
   accountability and audit formats can remain separate while a protocol
   still preserves stable operation or instruction identity, input
   binding, source-attributable outcomes, and non-success or non-final
   distinctions.  This document uses that boundary without claiming that
   the mailing-list discussion constitutes working-group consensus.

   The distinction is that this document does not ask the protocol to
   define what an auditor concludes.  It asks protocol transitions not
   to erase the identifiers, bindings, target-set information, outcomes,
   and failure semantics that any downstream verifier would need, while
   also refusing to infer that an origin-side fact necessarily survived
   to the eventual reader.

8.  Composition with Existing Mechanisms

8.1.  Native Verification First

   Each credential, signature, attestation, authorization result,
   transport acknowledgement, telemetry record, and transparency receipt
   retains its native semantics and verifier.  A reconciler MUST perform
   or consume the result of the native verification before treating the
   artifact as evidence for a control-delivery claim.

   A self-declared algorithm, key identifier, role, observer label, or
   target-set coverage claim MUST NOT drive trust without an externally
   configured or otherwise verified binding when the requested claim
   requires that trust.  Composition MUST NOT strengthen the weakest
   input beyond its verified meaning.  Where structural processing
   continues despite a missing trust predicate, the claim-support
   qualification MUST preserve that limitation.

8.2.  SCITT Composition

   [RFC9943] defines Signed Statements and receipts for registration in
   a transparency service.  A control observation, target-set binding,
   or reconciliation report can be carried as, or referenced by, a SCITT
   Signed Statement.  A SCITT receipt can then provide evidence of the
   registration properties defined by that service.

   This document does not require a new SCITT receipt format.  Existing
   Signed Statements and profile-specific payload bindings can carry or
   reference the facts defined here when their native semantics are
   preserved.






Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 26]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   SCITT registration does not, by itself, prove that a control was
   delivered, enforced, correctly observed, or true.  Those meanings
   still depend on the observation boundary, native verification,
   content and target binding, target-set scope, and reconciliation
   rules defined here and in the applicable profile.

8.3.  Telemetry and Trace Composition

   Telemetry systems can carry timestamps, trace identifiers, and
   correlated events.  A trace identifier can help locate related
   records, but trace membership alone does not establish instruction-
   content equality, authority, target-bound receipt, ordering across
   untrusted clocks, target-set completeness, or independence.  Profiles
   using telemetry MUST state which required bindings are native,
   derived, declared-only, or absent.

9.  Operational Considerations

9.1.  Deadlines, Retries, and Late Evidence

   Deployments SHOULD define acknowledgement and reconciliation
   deadlines based on the controlled risk and transport characteristics.
   The deadline source, start event, units, and clock basis need to be
   explicit.  A late receiver observation can change UNCONFIRMED to
   CONFIRMED in a later reconciliation run, but the earlier report and
   its cutoff SHOULD remain available.

   Retries SHOULD reuse or relate identifiers according to a declared
   rule.  Reusing one identifier for different instruction content
   creates SUBSTITUTION, not a retry.  Creating a new identifier for
   every retry without a common attempt-group reference can hide
   repeated delivery failures.

9.2.  Durability and Acknowledgement Point

   A profile SHOULD state whether receiver acknowledgement occurs after
   parsing, verification, durable persistence, admission to an
   enforcement queue, or completed enforcement.  Implementations MUST
   NOT use the same acknowledgement value for several of those points
   unless the profile defines the combined semantics and residual
   failure window.










Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 27]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


9.3.  Multiple Enforcement Paths

   A control can be ineffective even when one enforcement point applies
   it if an alternate path remains open.  A deployment claiming delivery
   across multiple required enforcement paths SHOULD bind those paths
   into a Required Target Set and reconcile each resulting Delivery
   Obligation separately.

   A deployment claiming complete control mediation SHOULD identify the
   deployment scope and the evidence by which the Required Target Set is
   considered to cover all relevant paths.  A set being closed for a
   reconciliation run does not, by itself, prove that the enumeration is
   complete.

9.4.  Control Activation and In-Flight Operations

   A profile that reports APPLIED for a freeze, revoke, cancel, or
   similar control SHOULD define the local effective boundary and the
   relationship between the control and operations that were already
   admitted, consumed, dispatched, or in flight when the control took
   effect.

   Every boundary crossing is a historical fact.  A reconciler MUST NOT
   retroactively relabel a boundary transition that occurred before
   control activation, and MUST NOT relabel an operation as blocked
   merely because a later control was APPLIED.  Only a boundary crossing
   that actually occurred before activation is protected from
   retroactive relabelling.

   Local admission and provider entry are distinct boundaries and are
   not interchangeable.  If an operation was admitted before control
   activation but had not yet crossed a later provider-entry or other
   enforcement boundary, a subsequently applied control MAY still
   prevent that later transition under the applicable local semantics.
   The report MUST preserve the earlier admission fact and MUST
   separately preserve the later refusal or blocked transition.  An
   operation that was admitted, or that is in flight, is therefore not
   automatically exempt from a later applicable enforcement boundary:
   non-retroactivity protects the record of what already happened, not
   the operation's remaining transitions.

   Where the operation did cross the relevant profile-defined boundary
   before control activation, its outcome at that boundary remains a
   separate lifecycle fact.  Missing authenticated outcome evidence for
   that operation MUST remain unresolved or indeterminate according to
   the applicable outcome profile.





Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 28]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   Similarly, a later control-effect observation that a subsequent
   operation was blocked does not prove that an earlier operation
   produced no external effect or that a prior effect was reversed.  A
   reversal, compensation, or remedy requires its own evidence and does
   not rewrite the historical ordering of the original operation.

10.  Security Considerations

   The evidence described here is security-relevant because it can drive
   escalation, incident response, or claims that an agent was stopped.
   An attacker can target the instruction, the delivery path, the
   target-resolution input, the observer, the evidence store, the
   verifier, or the reconciliation population.

10.1.  Substitution, Replay, and Identifier Reuse

   An attacker can reuse an instruction identifier with weaker content,
   replay an old acknowledgement, correlate a receiver record to the
   wrong attempt, or bind a valid observation from target A to target B.
   Stable identifiers, attempt semantics, content digests, freshness
   rules, target binding, and attempt-group semantics mitigate these
   attacks.  Digest algorithms and canonicalization rules need
   downgrade-resistant selection.

10.2.  Observer and Key Compromise

   A valid signature proves control of a signing key over the signed
   bytes; it does not prove that the observer actually saw the asserted
   event.  Key-to-observer binding, protected key use, process and
   storage separation, attestation where appropriate, and independent
   observation can improve confidence.  None should be overstated as
   ground truth.

10.3.  Evidence Suppression and Selective Population

   A producer can suppress failed controls, omit a required target, or
   choose a favorable subset after the fact.  Bounded-population
   construction before receiver-evidence evaluation, target-set binding,
   entry-emission rules, append-only or transparency mechanisms, and
   independent counters can make suppression more detectable.  An open
   population cannot support a completeness claim.

   A target set can also be made deceptively small while remaining
   internally closed.  Structural conservation over that set is not
   evidence that no omitted path exists.  Complete-mediation claims
   therefore require the separate coverage qualification in R-CD-15.





Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 29]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


10.4.  Availability and Fail-Safe Policy

   An attacker can withhold acknowledgements or evidence to force fail-
   safe shutdowns, or flood a reconciler with orphan and invalid
   records.  Implementations need resource limits, authenticated inputs,
   replay control, rate limiting, and a local policy that balances
   safety and availability.  The evidence layer MUST preserve the
   uncertain state even when local policy chooses to continue operation.

10.5.  Semantic and Physical-World Gaps

   Matching digests do not prove that two implementations assign the
   same meaning to a control verb.  An enforcement assertion does not
   prove a physical-world outcome.  Profiles need versioned control
   semantics and scoped effect predicates.  High-consequence deployments
   require domain-specific validation beyond this document.

   An intermediary can also preserve syntax while weakening semantics,
   for example by mapping several source dispositions to one downstream
   label or by dropping source attribution.  Such a transformation can
   make a downstream record look more definite than the upstream fact.
   Profiles that rely on intermediary-carried evidence need the lossless
   mapping or explicit uncertainty required by R-CD-16; cryptographic
   integrity of the transformed record does not restore a distinction
   that the transformation erased.

11.  Privacy Considerations

   Control evidence can reveal agent identities, user relationships,
   incident timing, policy decisions, operational topology, target-set
   membership, and sensitive task state.  Stable identifiers can enable
   correlation across services and observation windows.

   Implementations SHOULD minimize payloads, use scoped or pseudonymous
   identifiers where possible, separate identity resolution from routine
   evidence exchange, apply access controls and retention limits, and
   support selective disclosure.  Raw prompts, chain-of-thought, model
   context, personal data, and proprietary policy SHOULD NOT be included
   by default.

   Publishing a digest instead of content reduces direct disclosure but
   does not eliminate it.  Digests of low-entropy or enumerable values
   can be guessed.  Profiles SHOULD use commitments, nonces, or access-
   controlled references where dictionary attacks are relevant.







Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 30]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   Independent observation and explicit target-set accounting increase
   corroboration but can also increase data replication and linkability.
   The independence and coverage requirements are scoped to claims that
   need them; they do not require disclosure of every event or internal
   topology to every party.

12.  Implementation Status

   This section is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   This section records implementation and evaluation experience
   available as of 4 September 2026 and is intended to be removed before
   publication as an RFC.  The entries below are deliberately scoped to
   the requirement or failure mode they exercise.  Adjacent
   interoperability results that do not implement this document are not
   promoted into implementation claims.

   The AI Runtime Evidence Protocol (AIREP) [AIREP-REPO] is an
   experimental, author-side source for several distinctions in this
   document.  Its v0.1 control-delivery profile records issuer,
   enforcement-point, and witness observations and includes a total
   reconciler that does not treat issuer-side emission alone as
   receiver-side delivery.  This is useful implementation input, but
   AIREP is not the conformance authority for this document and its
   broader interoperability evidence is not used here as proof of this
   draft.  In particular, the public AIREP external-evidence record
   [AIREP-EXTERNAL-EVIDENCE] contains a v0.1.2 external-producer result
   and a separate v0.2 external consumer/verifier result; because they
   target different frozen versions, those results are explicitly non-
   additive and are not a producer-to-consumer interoperability result
   for any one AIREP version.

   A separate author-side runtime probe in phionyx-research
   [PHIONYX-CONTROL-DELIVERY] records issuer-side and enforcement-point
   observations on opposite filesystem trust sides and correlates them
   by instruction identifier and instruction hash.  The enforcement-side
   record explicitly declares that it is writable by the controlled
   system and is therefore corroboration, not proof.  Its delivery audit
   also states that an issued instruction with no acknowledgement is
   unaccounted for, not proven undelivered, because delivery failure,
   evidence-recording failure, and a never-demanded override are not yet
   distinguishable.  The associated tests pin identity/hash correlation,
   separate-side recording, coverage of every override-consuming gate,
   and non-silent evidence-write failure.  This is partial author-side
   implementation experience; it does not establish independent
   implementation, complete mediation, or observed control effect.





Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 31]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   The historical standalone Agent Control Delivery Evidence
   Reconciliation (ACDER) probe [ACDER-REF] implements an earlier
   instruction-target obligation model with seven fixtures.  It is
   retained as a pinned author-side research artifact.  It does not
   implement the full claim-support and intermediary semantic-
   preservation model in this revision, is not on current AIREP main,
   and is not an independent implementation of this document.

   A proposed format-neutral fixture contributed by Iman Schrock of
   EMILIA Protocol on the SCITT mailing list [SCHROCK-FIXTURE-MSG]
   combines target multiplicity with a control-activation race.  Its
   fixture identifier is freeze-after-provider-entry-with-multiple-
   required-targets and its SHA-256 is
   2d8faa1b64b8a73fd0bf81b21889bbf726cbfb324af099b700499627af84203a.  If
   that fixture is used unchanged, its identifier and digest are
   preserved.  An adapted derivative receives a new fixture identifier
   and records the source fixture identifier and digest as provenance
   [SCHROCK-FIXTURE-PROVENANCE].  The contributed fixture is test input,
   not an implementation of this document; its historical related-work
   pin is not silently rewritten when current related-work references
   advance.

   Cross-domain review and a pinned population probe against Cedulon
   [DOGRU-POPULATION-PROBE] informed the bounded-population and claim-
   qualification rules.  The probe exposed a reporting-scope defect in
   the adjacent implementation rather than a defect in this document.
   That probe remains pinned to the artifact and package versions it was
   executed against.  Later reviewer-reported measurements against
   Cedulon 0.8.0 and 0.12.0 were independently rerun by the author on 4
   September 2026 from separate clean directories against the published
   package sets, using the reviewer's pinned case driver at Cedulon
   commit 52cf577 [DOGRU-REVIEW-CASES].  The rerun reproduced the scoped
   behaviors recorded in the public work area.  This is an author-side
   reproduction of an adjacent-domain measurement, not an implementation
   of this document, and it does not repin or replace the historical 1
   September probe.  Current Cedulon [I-D.dogru-cedulon] binds returned
   audit results to an account, rail, and window and conditions stronger
   claims on its declared scope and trust predicates.  Cedulon remains
   adjacent-domain evaluation evidence, not an implementation of this
   document.

   The AIREP artifacts, the phionyx-research runtime probe, the
   historical ACDER probe, the contributed EMILIA fixture, and the
   Cedulon probe retain distinct provenance and claim boundaries.  They
   are not merged into a self-validating conformance suite for this
   document.  Additional independent implementations are sought,
   particularly for per-target obligation reconciliation, claim-support
   qualification, and semantic preservation through intermediaries.



Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 32]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


13.  Relationship to Adjacent Work

   The agent communication use-case and requirements work
   [I-D.agentic-ai-usecases-requirements] treats accountability and
   auditing as separate work.  This document is compatible with that
   boundary: it defines only the minimum facts and distinctions that
   need to survive protocol transitions so an external evidence layer
   can later bind them.  AgentProto mailing-list discussion on a minimal
   preservation requirement [AGENTPROTO-PRESERVATION] and its path-
   preservation follow-up [AGENTPROTO-PRESERVATION-PATH] sharpen that
   distinction without creating a receipt format or audit regime.

   [I-D.bu-agentproto-security-principal-binding] separates claims,
   carriers, verifiers, bindings, failure behavior, and accepted results
   for agent protocols.  The requirements here specialize that
   discipline for the control-delivery lifecycle and its boundary sides.

   Signed decision records [I-D.bradleyb-audit-decision-records]
   preserve authorization decisions, including denials and non-occurring
   actions, and distinguish correspondence from precedence.  A decision
   record can be an upstream reference for this document.  It does not
   by itself establish that a resulting control instruction reached an
   enforcement point.

   The Action Evidence Boundary [I-D.schrock-action-evidence-boundary]
   defines an executor-side processing model for consequential agent
   effects, including action correlation, local authorization, atomic
   consumption, invocation, effect outcomes, and reconciliation.  This
   document addresses a different direction and object: a governance
   control such as stop or revoke moving toward the component that
   constrains the runtime.  The "control effect" here is the governed
   runtime state, not the consequential business or physical effect of
   the protected action.

   Portable Revocation Statements [I-D.schrock-ep-revocation-statement]
   bind revocation to an exact authorization target and effective time
   but explicitly do not prove that every relying party received the
   revocation.  That distribution boundary composes directly with this
   document: a valid revocation statement can be an upstream control
   fact, while receiver-side delivery and enforcement remain separate
   evidence questions.  This document does not redefine the revocation
   statement format or its atomic execution semantics.









Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 33]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   Outcome Binding [I-D.schrock-ep-outcome-binding] separates evidence
   availability from comparison and uses pinned source roles and
   observation windows for post-execution effects.  A control-effect
   observation in this document can compose with such outcome evidence
   where the predicates align.  This document does not redefine
   consequential-action outcome states, source quorum, or physical-
   effect reconciliation.

   Contestability Bindings [I-D.pinto-agent-authz-contestability] define
   a narrower effect path for an authenticated contestation filing.
   That work separately represents the declared effect policy, executor
   acceptance, authenticated trigger, ordering, and claimed application.
   The shared discipline is to avoid collapsing separately evidenced
   stages into a stronger end-to-end fact.  This document therefore
   treats that effect-state model as a composition boundary rather than
   restating its states.

   Execution-finality work [I-D.das-agentic-execution-finality]
   distinguishes model tool selection from authorized execution at a
   dispatch-time gate.  A stop or revoke control can target such a gate.
   The present document asks how delivery and enforcement of that
   control are evidenced, rather than how the underlying tool action is
   authorized.

   The SCITT AI-agent receipt profile [I-D.noa-scitt-ai-agent-receipt]
   defines how an action receipt can be registered using SCITT.  This
   document is format-neutral and can supply control-delivery statement
   semantics for a SCITT-based profile without changing SCITT's
   registration semantics.

   Cedulon [I-D.dogru-cedulon] reconciles a spend that has already
   occurred against signed receipts and an authenticated rail extract.
   Its object moves in the opposite direction from a control instruction
   moving toward an enforcement point, but the works share bounded-
   population, total-accounting, and qualified-claim disciplines.
   Cedulon revision -08 explicitly scopes returned audit results to an
   account, rail, and window and prevents those results from being read
   as statements about paths the reconciliation did not examine.  This
   document does not restate Cedulon's payment, settlement, or rail-
   extract semantics and does not describe Cedulon as an implementation
   of this document.

   The OWASP Agentic AI Threats and Mitigations project [OWASP-APTS]
   includes a human-oversight requirement that an unacknowledged kill
   instruction not be treated as delivered.  The requirements and
   negative-observation rules in this document generalize that
   implementation concern into a protocol-independent evidence contract.




Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 34]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


14.  Changes Since -00

   This section is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   This revision incorporates public SCITT review of -00, relevant
   AgentProto requirements discussion, and subsequent implementation
   evidence.  The principal changes are:

   *  Introduced Required Target Set and Delivery Obligation terminology
      so one receiver observation cannot satisfy a multi-target parent
      instruction.

   *  Revised R-CD-4, R-CD-5, R-CD-10, and R-CD-11 to bind target sets
      and reconcile per instruction-target obligation.

   *  Added R-CD-15 to distinguish a population that is closed for
      structural reconciliation from evidence that the target
      enumeration is complete for a stronger complete-mediation claim.

   *  Replaced per-instruction population conservation with obligation-
      level conservation while retaining separate receiver-record
      accounting, and added instruction-level accounting so an
      instruction whose Required Target Set resolves to zero members
      remains reported and conserved rather than disappearing from
      reconciliation.

   *  Added parent-instruction aggregation rules: a parent can be fully
      confirmed within its declared target set only when every required
      obligation is CONFIRMED.

   *  Split structural aggregate results from claim-support
      qualification, defining FULLY_SUPPORTED, CONDITIONALLY_SUPPORTED,
      and NOT_SUPPORTED conceptual meanings, and required the claim
      scope and claim-support qualification to be exposed in the same
      result context as any exposed structural aggregate result.

   *  Added control-activation rules preventing a later APPLIED freeze
      or revocation from retroactively relabelling a boundary transition
      that occurred before activation, while distinguishing local
      admission from a later provider-entry or other enforcement
      boundary that a subsequently applied control may still refuse.

   *  Clarified that SCITT Signed Statements and profile bindings can
      carry or reference these facts without introducing a new receipt
      format.






Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 35]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   *  Added R-CD-16 and protocol-attachment guidance for semantic
      preservation through intermediaries, including the non-claim that
      preservation at an originating boundary does not establish that
      the distinction survived intact to the eventual reader.

   *  Required many-to-one diagnostic reduction to be deterministic and
      reviewable, required non-selected applicable diagnostics to remain
      visible or explicitly linked, and declined to define a universal
      precedence order.

   *  Clarified implementation and evaluation status so author-side
      probes, contributed fixtures, adjacent-domain evaluations, and
      unrelated cross-version interoperability results retain separate
      claim boundaries.

   *  Expanded adjacent-work composition for AgentProto preservation
      requirements, contestability, revocation, outcome binding, and
      Cedulon reconciliation.

   *  Updated implementation/test-vector status with the current AIREP
      control-delivery source, the phionyx-research author-side runtime
      probe, the historical ACDER probe, and provenance-preserving
      treatment of the contributed EMILIA Protocol fixture; broader
      AIREP cross-version interoperability remains explicitly non-
      additive.

   *  Expanded the minimum conformance cases for target multiplicity,
      target-set coverage qualification, structural-result/claim-support
      separation, in-flight races, empty required-target populations,
      bare aggregate results exposed without their qualification, many-
      to-one diagnostic reduction, and failure asserted from absent
      population evidence.

15.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

16.  Acknowledgements

   The author thanks participants in the agent2agent, agentproto, and
   SCITT communities whose discussions helped sharpen the distinction
   among decision, delivery, enforcement, and effect.









Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 36]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   The author thanks Iman Schrock of EMILIA Protocol for contributing
   the proposed freeze-after-provider-entry-with-multiple-required-
   targets fixture, requesting that the fixture ID and EMILIA Protocol
   attribution be preserved, and reviewing target multiplicity, the
   required-target and freeze-race fixture, in-flight operation
   semantics, and fixture provenance.

   The author thanks Emek Can Dogru for public review of bounded-
   population accounting, the separation of the structural
   reconciliation result from claim support, diagnostic reduction, and
   the empty required-target accounting observation.  Both named
   reviewers gave permission to be named here.

   The author also thanks SCITT participants who provided public review
   on bounded populations, qualified claims, adjacent-work composition,
   SCITT carriage, and implementation-reporting boundaries, as well as
   AgentProto participants whose public discussion sharpened the
   protocol-preservation and intermediary-path non-claims.  Specific
   additional names can be added with permission in a later revision.
   Being named here records a review contribution only; these
   acknowledgements do not imply endorsement of this document by any
   named individual, organization, or working group.

17.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

18.  Informative References

   [ACDER-REF]
              Abak, A. T., "Agent Control Delivery Evidence
              Reconciliation (ACDER): Experimental Reference", Commit
              449f4fb6a07fd54b45a6e68208dece109446ef93, 31 August 2026,
              <https://github.com/halvrenofviryel/ai-runtime-evidence-
              protocol/tree/449f4fb6a07fd54b45a6e68208dece109446ef93/
              research/nist-acder>.

   [AGENTPROTO-PRESERVATION]
              Abak, A. T., "AgentProto discussion: protocol-level
              information preservation at governance boundaries",
              AgentProto mailing-list message and quoted review context,



Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 37]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


              30 August 2026,
              <https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/agentproto/
              A99A4-uKcOG6FwbDgp3fhK3wfUk/>.

   [AGENTPROTO-PRESERVATION-PATH]
              Abak, A. T., "AgentProto discussion: preservation of
              governance-relevant distinctions through intermediaries",
              AgentProto mailing-list follow-up incorporating review
              from Nancy Sahu and Sumit Ahuja, 31 August 2026,
              <https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/agentproto/Vum-
              DPI6xfAnHYmv747qqoSHryU/>.

   [AIREP-EXTERNAL-EVIDENCE]
              Abak, A. T., "AIREP External Evidence: Frozen Producer and
              Consumer/Verifier Measurements", Repository snapshot at
              commit a3973ce3b6ad984635867a2bb52d83c472e5c0cb, 2
              September 2026, <https://github.com/halvrenofviryel/ai-
              runtime-evidence-
              protocol/blob/a3973ce3b6ad984635867a2bb52d83c472e5c0cb/
              EXTERNAL_EVIDENCE.md>.

   [AIREP-REPO]
              Abak, A. T., "AI Runtime Evidence Protocol (AIREP):
              Repository Snapshot", Commit
              a3973ce3b6ad984635867a2bb52d83c472e5c0cb, 2 September
              2026, <https://github.com/halvrenofviryel/ai-runtime-
              evidence-protocol/tree/
              a3973ce3b6ad984635867a2bb52d83c472e5c0cb>.

   [DOGRU-POPULATION-PROBE]
              Dogru, E. C., "Cedulon population-conservation probe
              against draft-abak-00", Commit 0a3fa04; SHA-256
              031f84fda2054b1427a510baa45f880d379ea60dced408a4a74028da12b1fceb,
              1 September 2026, <https://github.com/dogrucanemek-
              alt/cedulon/blob/0a3fa04/interop/abak-00/population-
              probe.mjs>.

   [DOGRU-REVIEW-CASES]
              Dogru, E. C., "Cedulon review case driver used for the
              draft-abak-01 focused review", Reviewer-authored case
              driver exercising published Cedulon packages; commit
              52cf577; observed SHA-256
              f7f1218abd1535f104b0010b9127c565b3afab0e72242583ebc459000937bc8e.
              Not test code for this document., 3 September 2026,
              <https://github.com/dogrucanemek-
              alt/cedulon/blob/52cf577/interop/abak-00/cases-
              0.12.0.mjs>.




Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 38]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   [I-D.agentic-ai-usecases-requirements]
              Reddy.K, T., Sarker, Z., and K. Yao, "Agentic AI Use Cases
              and Requirements", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-agentic-ai-usecases-requirements-02, 25 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-agentic-ai-
              usecases-requirements/>.

   [I-D.bradleyb-audit-decision-records]
              B, B., "Signed Decision Records for Agent Authorization:
              Disclosures, Entry Emission, and Ordering Evidence", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-bradleyb-audit-
              decision-records-00, 13 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-bradleyb-audit-
              decision-records/>.

   [I-D.bu-agentproto-security-principal-binding]
              Bu, S., "Security Principal and Verifier Binding for Agent
              Communication Protocols", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-bu-agentproto-security-principal-binding-06,
              16 August 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              bu-agentproto-security-principal-binding/>.

   [I-D.das-agentic-execution-finality]
              Das, S., "Tool Selection Is Not Execution: Finality for
              Agentic Tool Dispatch", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-das-agentic-execution-finality-01, 26 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-das-agentic-
              execution-finality/>.

   [I-D.dogru-cedulon]
              Dogru, E. C., "Cedulon: An Audit Layer for Agent-to-Agent
              Commerce", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-dogru-
              cedulon-08, 2 September 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-dogru-cedulon/>.

   [I-D.noa-scitt-ai-agent-receipt]
              Toraman, T., "A SCITT Profile for AI-Agent Action
              Receipts", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-noa-
              scitt-ai-agent-receipt-01, 14 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-noa-scitt-ai-
              agent-receipt/>.

   [I-D.pinto-agent-authz-contestability]
              Pinto, T., "Contestability Bindings for Authorized Agent
              Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-pinto-
              agent-authz-contestability-00, 29 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-pinto-agent-authz-
              contestability/>.



Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 39]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   [I-D.schrock-action-evidence-boundary]
              Schrock, I., "The Action Evidence Boundary for
              Consequential Agent Effects", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-schrock-action-evidence-boundary-05, 31
              August 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              schrock-action-evidence-boundary/>.

   [I-D.schrock-ep-outcome-binding]
              Schrock, I., "Outcome Binding for Authorized Actions and
              Independently Observed Effects", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-ep-outcome-binding-00, 28
              July 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              schrock-ep-outcome-binding/>.

   [I-D.schrock-ep-revocation-statement]
              Schrock, I., "Portable Revocation Statements for Action-
              Bound Authorization Artifacts", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-ep-revocation-statement-01,
              27 July 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              schrock-ep-revocation-statement/>.

   [OWASP-APTS]
              OWASP Foundation, "Agentic AI - Threats and Mitigations:
              Human Oversight", Repository snapshot at commit
              2b210945361bac207f37a21440d0f34c05c07ad9, 2026,
              <https://github.com/OWASP/APTS/
              blob/2b210945361bac207f37a21440d0f34c05c07ad9/
              standard/3_Human_Oversight/README.md>.

   [PHIONYX-CONTROL-DELIVERY]
              Abak, A. T., "Phionyx author-side control-delivery runtime
              probe and tests", Repository snapshot at commit
              706e40748be18e988d4efd1e307787e009161c6a;
              control_override.py and test_control_delivery_c1.py, 1
              September 2026, <https://github.com/halvrenofviryel/
              phionyx-
              research/tree/706e40748be18e988d4efd1e307787e009161c6a/
              tools/claude_code_mcp>.

   [RFC9943]  Birkholz, H., Delignat-Lavaud, A., Fournet, C., Deshpande,
              Y., and S. Lasker, "An Architecture for Trustworthy and
              Transparent Digital Supply Chains", RFC 9943,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9943, June 2026,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9943>.

   [SCHROCK-FIXTURE-MSG]
              Schrock, I., "SCITT review: proposed freeze-race and
              multi-target control-delivery fixture", SCITT mailing-list



Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 40]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


              message; attached fixture SHA-256
              2d8faa1b64b8a73fd0bf81b21889bbf726cbfb324af099b700499627af84203a,
              31 August 2026,
              <https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/scitt/
              YcoTPgdpSl2RNWvcsB1p3c4VpAM/>.

   [SCHROCK-FIXTURE-PROVENANCE]
              Schrock, I., "SCITT fixture provenance clarification for
              control-delivery test input", SCITT mailing-list message,
              31 August 2026, <https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/
              scitt/5J5i8Y6w3WkzewIzH23oMPpb9cI/>.

Illustrative Multi-Target Reconciliation Record

   The following example is deliberately not a wire format.  Field names
   are descriptive placeholders.  Equivalent facts can be carried in
   native protocol messages and external evidence artifacts.


































Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 41]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   {
     "instruction_id": "ctrl-7f3a",
     "instruction_digest": "sha-256:<digest>",
     "required_target_set": {
       "set_id": "targets:runtime-egress:v1",
       "structural_closure": "closed",
       "coverage_qualification": "DECLARED_ONLY",
       "members": ["EP-A", "EP-B"]
     },
     "target_results": [
       {
         "target_id": "EP-A",
         "delivery": "CONFIRMED",
         "enforcement": "APPLIED",
         "control_effect": "UNKNOWN"
       },
       {
         "target_id": "EP-B",
         "delivery": "UNCONFIRMED",
         "enforcement": "UNKNOWN",
         "control_effect": "UNKNOWN"
       }
     ],
     "parent_instruction": {
       "fully_confirmed_within_target_set": false
     },
     "structural_result": "INCONCLUSIVE",
     "claim": {
       "scope": "complete delivery to targets:runtime-egress:v1",
       "support": "NOT_SUPPORTED"
     }
   }

   The example does not support a fully confirmed parent delivery
   because EP-B is UNCONFIRMED.  The DECLARED_ONLY coverage
   qualification is a second, independent limitation: even if EP-B later
   became CONFIRMED, the named set alone would not prove that every
   possible enforcement path in the deployment was enumerated.

Contributed Freeze-Race Fixture Summary

   This appendix summarizes the proposed format-neutral fixture
   contributed by Iman Schrock of EMILIA Protocol in
   [SCHROCK-FIXTURE-MSG].  The fixture identifier and SHA-256 are
   preserved for provenance.

   fixture_id
      freeze-after-provider-entry-with-multiple-required-targets



Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 42]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   contributor
      Iman Schrock, EMILIA Protocol

   SHA-256
      2d8faa1b64b8a73fd0bf81b21889bbf726cbfb324af099b700499627af84203a

   required targets
      EP-A at checkout/provider-entry and EP-B at alternate-dispatch/
      provider-entry

   population note
      The set is closed for the fixture, while enumeration completeness
      is explicitly not independently proven.

   expected EP-A result
      delivery CONFIRMED; enforcement APPLIED; scoped control effect
      observed for a post-freeze operation.

   expected EP-B result
      delivery UNCONFIRMED; enforcement UNKNOWN; control effect UNKNOWN.

   in-flight operation
      O1 crossed provider entry before the freeze; it remains consumed
      or in flight with external effect UNKNOWN pending authenticated
      reconciliation.

   post-freeze operation
      O2 is refused by the freeze before provider entry at EP-A.

   parent claim
      Not fully confirmed; complete-delivery and PASS claims are not
      permitted for the two-target instruction in the fixture.

   The fixture also requires the following non-claims: EP-A receipt does
   not establish EP-B receipt; EP-A APPLIED does not establish complete
   control mediation; the scoped O2 observation does not establish that
   every dispatch path was closed; and applying the freeze after O1
   crossed provider entry does not retroactively relabel O1 as blocked
   or prove that O1 produced no external effect.

   Provenance handling follows the contributor's clarification
   [SCHROCK-FIXTURE-PROVENANCE].  An unchanged use keeps the original
   fixture identifier and SHA-256.  An adapted derivative uses a new
   fixture identifier and records the original fixture identifier and
   digest as source provenance, with EMILIA Protocol attribution
   retained.  The original fixture remains pinned to the related-work
   revisions it named when contributed; updating related-work citations
   in this document does not silently rewrite the fixture.



Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 43]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


Minimum Conformance Cases

   A profile claiming conformance to the reconciliation requirements
   SHOULD publish machine-readable test vectors for at least:

   1.   matching issuer and receiver records for one target: CONFIRMED;

   2.   expected obligation with issuer evidence only at cutoff:
        UNCONFIRMED;

   3.   same obligation identity with different digest: SUBSTITUTION;

   4.   receiver record with no expected obligation: ORPHAN record
        accounting;

   5.   positive transport rejection bound to one attempt and target:
        scoped EXPLICIT_FAILURE;

   6.   malformed expected obligation or issuer record: INVALID,
        retained in counts;

   7.   malformed receiver record: invalid receiver-record accounting;

   8.   duplicate matching receiver records: one match plus duplicate
        accounting under the profile's rule;

   9.   conflicting valid observations: CONFLICT;

   10.  missing acknowledgement without a negative-observation record:
        UNCONFIRMED, not EXPLICIT_FAILURE;

   11.  deadline-elapsed negative observation followed by late matching
        receipt: versioned reconciliation results preserving both
        cutoffs;

   12.  delivery CONFIRMED with enforcement UNKNOWN;

   13.  enforcement APPLIED with control effect UNKNOWN;

   14.  self-declared observer role without verified binding: no
        independence claim and no silent fully supported attribution;

   15.  unresolvable required-target or external binding: INDETERMINATE
        or INVALID according to the declared profile, never CONFIRMED;

   16.  a bounded obligation population whose category counts fail
        conservation: structural PASS rejected;




Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 44]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


   17.  one instruction with two required targets, EP-A CONFIRMED and
        EP-B UNCONFIRMED: one CONFIRMED plus one UNCONFIRMED obligation,
        parent not fully confirmed, and no complete-delivery PASS;

   18.  a receiver observation bound to EP-A presented as evidence for
        EP-B: EP-B is not CONFIRMED;

   19.  two required targets both CONFIRMED while target-set coverage is
        DECLARED_ONLY: a scoped result over the named set can be
        structurally complete, but a complete-mediation claim cannot be
        FULLY_SUPPORTED solely from that declaration;

   20.  an open or unresolved Required Target Set: no complete-delivery
        PASS over an unspecified population;

   21.  a structurally passing population with a profile-permitted
        missing external trust predicate: structural result preserved
        while the stronger claim is CONDITIONALLY_SUPPORTED and the
        missing predicate is named;

   22.  a positive failing condition supported by verified evidence:
        structural FAIL can still have FULLY_SUPPORTED claim support for
        the scoped failure statement;

   23.  a freeze applied after operation O1 crossed the relevant
        provider-entry boundary and before operation O2 attempts entry:
        O1 is not retroactively labelled blocked, O2 is blocked only
        within the evidenced target scope, and O1 outcome remains
        separately reconciled; and

   24.  a target set closed for the fixture but without independently
        verified enumeration completeness: structural accounting
        proceeds over the set while complete-mediation support remains
        qualified;

   25.  a source emits DEFER but an intermediary maps it to generic
        FAILURE without a lossless mapping: the relying party cannot
        claim that the original disposition survived intact and the
        resulting preservation state remains qualified or INDETERMINATE;

   26.  a stable instruction identifier survives an intermediary while
        the governed instruction content changes: identifier continuity
        alone does not satisfy content binding and MUST NOT produce
        CONFIRMED;

   27.  an issuer instruction whose target resolution succeeds and
        yields an empty Required Target Set: the instruction remains
        accounted for in the report, contributes zero Delivery



Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 45]

Internet-Draft       Agent Control Delivery Evidence      September 2026


        Obligations, is reported together with the rule or condition
        that produced the empty set, and does not disappear from
        reconciliation; instruction-level conservation over |I| still
        balances; and a structural PASS covering that instruction is
        available only where the profile explicitly declared an empty
        Required Target Set to be a valid terminal resolution before
        reconciliation;

   28.  a structural aggregate result exposed to a relying party without
        its corresponding claim scope and claim-support qualification in
        the same result context: a non-conformant representation that
        cannot be consumed as the complete result, exercised for a PASS
        result and for a FAIL result alike;

   29.  one Delivery Obligation or input record with several applicable
        diagnostics reduced to one primary disposition: the published
        reduction rule is deterministic and reviewable, exactly one
        primary disposition is selected, and every non-selected
        applicable diagnostic remains visible in the report or in an
        explicitly linked diagnostic collection, without any profile-
        specific precedence ordering being required by this document;
        and

   30.  an implementation reports FAIL because a receipt or issuer-side
        object is unmatched while the authenticated comparison
        population itself was never presented or established: the
        missing population evidence alone does not satisfy the positive
        failing condition that a structural FAIL requires under
        Section 6.5, and the result remains INCONCLUSIVE or otherwise
        qualified according to the profile's semantics.  This case
        exercises the existing rule that FAIL is not inferred from
        absence; it does not introduce a new disposition.

Author's Address

   Ali Toygar Abak
   Independent Researcher
   Email: founder@phionyx.ai
   URI:   https://phionyx.ai












Abak                      Expires 8 March 2027                 [Page 46]
