



Individual Submission                                         A. T. Abak
Internet-Draft                                    Independent Researcher
Intended status: Informational                         23 September 2026
Expires: 27 March 2027


          Claim-Preserving Exchange of AI Evaluation Evidence
             draft-abak-ai-evaluation-claim-preservation-00

Abstract

   AI evaluation records can pass through evaluation frameworks,
   exporters, evidence services, independent reviewers, and systems that
   make decisions.  A conversion can retain a score while losing whether
   the measurement ran, which result was selected, whether a criterion
   existed, or which evidence was unavailable.  Authenticating the
   converted record does not recover these distinctions.

   This document specifies format-neutral requirements for mapping
   profiles and consumers that exchange AI evaluation evidence.  It
   separates source assertions, explicit derivations, and later policy
   judgments; requires claim-relevant loss and uncertainty to remain
   visible; and describes consumer behavior when preservation cannot be
   established.  It includes synthetic counterexamples and guidance for
   composition with existing evidence mechanisms.  It defines neither a
   wire format nor an evaluation benchmark, safety certification,
   authorization protocol, or new cryptographic envelope.  A concrete
   mapping profile is needed for interoperable implementation.

Discussion of This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   This is an individual contribution with an Informational target.  No
   working-group adoption or endorsement is implied.  Comments may be
   sent to the author.  The choice between a standalone application
   profile and guidance incorporated into existing work remains open.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.




Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 27 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.2.  Requirements Language and Applicability . . . . . . . . .   5
   2.  Terminology and Claim Boundaries  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Exchange and Failure Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  Preservation Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  R-CP-1: Source and Mapping Identity . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.2.  R-CP-2: Unambiguous Result Selection  . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.3.  R-CP-3: Execution, Observation, and Assessment  . . . . .   9
     4.4.  R-CP-4: Values, Units, and Numerical Transformations  . .   9
     4.5.  R-CP-5: Criteria, New Judgments, and Chronology . . . . .  10
     4.6.  R-CP-6: Coverage, Aggregation, and Attempts . . . . . . .  10
     4.7.  R-CP-7: Qualified Identity and Evaluation Context . . . .  10
     4.8.  R-CP-8: Evidence Availability and Digest Knowledge  . . .  11
     4.9.  R-CP-9: Loss, Conflict, and Multi-Hop Preservation  . . .  11
     4.10. R-CP-10: Typed Verification and Bounded Consumption . . .  12
     4.11. R-CP-11: Separate Reliance and Downstream Decisions . . .  12
     4.12. R-CP-12: Versioned Mappings and Verification Evidence . .  13
   5.  What a Concrete Mapping Profile Must Specify  . . . . . . . .  13
   6.  Consumer Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   7.  Worked Counterexamples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     7.1.  Run Completion Is Not a Scoring Verdict . . . . . . . . .  15
     7.2.  A Run Identifier Does Not Select a Metric . . . . . . . .  16
     7.3.  Local Success and Incomplete Coverage . . . . . . . . . .  17
     7.4.  Rounding Can Change a Decision  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18



Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


     7.5.  A Restricted Reference Is Not Verified Bytes  . . . . . .  18
     7.6.  Later Authentication Does Not Repair Earlier Loss . . . .  19
   8.  Relationship to Existing Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     8.1.  Attestation and Transparency  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     8.2.  Criteria and Evidence Qualification . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     8.3.  Provenance and Existing Evidence Formats  . . . . . . . .  20
     8.4.  Control Delivery Is a Separate Boundary . . . . . . . . .  20
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   10. Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   11. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   12. Implementation and Validation Status  . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   13. Further Specification Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   14. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     14.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     14.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   Appendix A.  Mapping Test Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
     A.1.  Run completes; score has no established criterion . . . .  25
     A.2.  Source explicitly declares no criterion; another source has
            an omitted unknown criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
     A.3.  Consumer applies a new threshold to a source score  . . .  26
     A.4.  Two metrics share one task and run identifier . . . . . .  26
     A.5.  Unexecuted, errored, or invalidated measurement . . . . .  26
     A.6.  Partial campaign has successful results in the observed
            subset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
     A.7.  Retries and duplicate records change an apparent
            denominator  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
     A.8.  Rounding or a unit conversion crosses a threshold . . . .  26
     A.9.  Only a model display name or declared network setting is
            available  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
     A.10. Evidence reference is supplied without bytes or digest  .  26
     A.11. Digest is copied from an authenticated report . . . . . .  26
     A.12. An earlier hop drops a material qualification . . . . . .  27
     A.13. Carrier verifies but semantic profile is unsupported  . .  27
     A.14. Export succeeds without any decision record . . . . . . .  27
     A.15. Criteria commitment exists but run ordering is not
            supported  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     A.16. A corrected result conflicts with an earlier result . . .  27
     A.17. A new profile basis is supplied to an old consumer  . . .  27
     A.18. A loss manifest is substituted between two conversions  .  27
     A.19. Duplicate JSON keys or ambiguous selection affect a
            score  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     A.20. Two consumers accept the same source but apply different
            policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27







Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


1.  Introduction

   Consider an evaluation operator that exports results to an evidence
   service.  A second organization retrieves a summary from that service
   and uses selected results in its own decision system.  These
   boundaries can involve different native formats, parser versions,
   aggregation conventions, access permissions, and trust policies.  A
   correctly authenticated summary can nevertheless misrepresent the
   source if a conversion changes the meaning of a result.

   Native formats already make relevant distinctions.  Inspect documents
   evaluation-log status separately from scoring results [INSPECT].
   LightEval documents task-indexed numerical results and configuration
   metadata [LIGHTEVAL].  This document does not allege a defect in
   either implementation.  Its question is what a converter and a
   downstream consumer need to preserve when exchanging such records.

   For example, completion of a run does not mean that a metric met a
   criterion.  A consumer can legitimately apply its own threshold to a
   source score, but that is a new assessment by that consumer, not a
   verdict reported by the original evaluator.  Similarly, checking a
   signature on a model-name assertion does not establish which model
   actually executed.

   General evidence-to-decision architectures and preservation
   principles are not new contributions of this document.  RATS
   separates evidence appraisal from relying-party policy [RFC9334].
   Related work on evidence qualification, statement graphs, and agent
   control intermediaries is discussed in Section 8.  The contribution
   proposed here is a bounded set of requirements for AI-evaluation-
   specific mappings: result selection, run and measurement state,
   scores and criteria, population scope, and the qualifications that
   survive conversion.

1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals

   The requirements apply to exchange across components or
   administrative domains, including offline exchange.  They apply to
   evaluations of AI systems, including frontier-system use cases,
   without defining a frontier capability threshold.  They do not
   require native evaluation frameworks to adopt a new format or to
   disclose confidential samples.









Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   This document does not define scientific validity, acceptable risk,
   evaluator competence or independence, legal authority, or whether
   deployment should occur.  It does not create an evidence-to-decision
   graph format, transparency service, trust-anchor system, or control-
   delivery mechanism.  Accurate preservation of an unsupported or false
   source assertion does not make that assertion true.

1.2.  Requirements Language and Applicability

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [BCP14] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown
   here.

   These requirements apply to a mapping profile, converter, or consumer
   that explicitly adopts them.  They do not retroactively change the
   specifications of native formats or evidence carriers.  A claim of
   compliance with these requirements MUST identify the concrete
   profile, the implementation role, and the tested version; a bare
   claim of "claim-preserving" is insufficient.  A profile supplies the
   encodings, selection rules, and processing details identified in
   Section 5.  This document alone is not a complete wire-level
   interoperability specification.

   An application can accept a limited result while withholding a
   stronger conclusion.  Preservation failures affect the conclusions
   that require the missing distinction; they do not automatically make
   every other field unusable.  No requirement here prescribes a
   particular deployment or business decision.

2.  Terminology and Claim Boundaries

   Native evidence
      The source output of an evaluation process, such as a result file,
      sample record, log, or configuration.  "Native" identifies
      provenance, not truth or completeness.  Evidence is used here in a
      general sense, not as a replacement definition for RATS Evidence.

   Result unit
      The particular source observation or assessment being exchanged:
      an identified source object and selection, together with the run,
      attempt, task, scorer, metric, aggregation, and population context
      needed to distinguish it.  A run identifier alone need not
      identify a result unit.

   Mapping profile




Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


      An identified, versioned definition of source and destination
      interpretations, selection rules, permitted transformations,
      preserved qualifications, and consumer behavior.  It is not a
      model-safety profile.

   Mapping instance
      A particular application of a mapping profile to identified source
      objects.  It records the converter, outputs, transformations, and
      material limitations of that application.

   Source assertion
      An assertion attributable to an identified source, including its
      scope and qualifications.  A copied assertion does not become
      independently observed merely because a converter signs it.

   Derivation
      A reported calculation or transformation with identified inputs
      and rules.  A derivation may add useful information, but it is
      distinct from a source assertion.  A policy judgment based on it
      is also distinct.

   Verification basis
      The procedure, inputs, accepted identities or trust material, and
      policy under which a particular verification result is produced.
      Different verification types establish different properties.

   Material qualification
      Context or uncertainty needed to interpret a stated claim, such as
      a denominator, missing samples, a criterion, units, access
      limitations, or the distinction between declared and verified
      identity.  Materiality is relative to the claim and mapping
      profile, not to an arbitrary converter preference.

   Claim preservation
      Preservation of the attribution, meaning, scope, and material
      qualifications of the source assertions selected for exchange.  It
      does not prohibit explicitly identified derivations or new
      judgments.  It prohibits representing those as stronger original
      assertions or silently broadening what the source supports.

   Reliance record
      A record asserting that an actor used identified evidence as an
      input to a particular decision under an identified policy.  It
      does not, by itself, establish causation, complete deliberation,
      valid authority, or enforcement.






Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   Claim preservation is evaluated for a specified mapping and bounded
   claim set.  This document provides no universal decision procedure
   for semantic equivalence, natural-language entailment, or arbitrary
   converter correctness.  A profile that claims preservation of a
   particular distinction needs an explicit rule and testable examples
   for that distinction.

3.  Exchange and Failure Model

   The roles are source operator, converter or publisher, evidence
   service, consumer or verifier, and optional decision maker.  One
   entity can perform several roles.  Different names, keys, or services
   do not establish organizational independence.

   Native result + context
              |
     identified mapping + loss record
              |
         evidence view  -----> another mapping, if present
              |
          consumer
              |
     optional new assessment / real reliance decision

                      Figure 1: Example Exchange Path

   The protected unit of exchange can use existing statements,
   attachments, or referenced objects.  Co-location in a file, matching
   display names, and nearby timestamps do not establish a required
   relationship.  The profile needs an explicit binding between the
   source selection, mapping information, and output; otherwise a loss
   statement from one conversion could be substituted for that of
   another.

   Failures include status coercion, task or metric substitution,
   omitted failed attempts, changed denominators, rounding across a
   threshold, criterion laundering, identity substitution, stale or
   revised source objects, and loss of access restrictions.  Attackers
   can exploit the same conditions deliberately.  The requirements also
   address honest conversion mistakes; they do not assume an honest
   source or converter merely because its output is signed.

   A source may already be incomplete or contradictory.  A converter can
   preserve that condition or report that it cannot map it.  It cannot
   reconstruct missing observations from an absence of evidence.  A
   consumer may need external evidence or a narrower claim, rather than
   a more permissive default.




Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


4.  Preservation Requirements

4.1.  R-CP-1: Source and Mapping Identity

   A mapping instance MUST identify its source objects, source format
   and interpretation basis, destination basis, converter
   implementation/version, and mapping-profile revision.  Where a source
   revision cannot be established, that limitation MUST be explicit and
   MUST NOT be replaced with an assumed current revision.  A content
   digest identifies bytes; it does not by itself identify the rules
   used to interpret those bytes.

   The instance MUST bind the output and material mapping information to
   the source objects and selections on which they depend.  For each
   content digest, the algorithm and byte selection or canonicalization
   rule MUST be identified.  Hashing an original JSON file and hashing a
   canonical representation are different operations; a profile MUST NOT
   silently substitute one for the other.  Native source objects SHOULD
   remain available under the applicable access policy; their
   unavailability is handled under Section 4.8.

4.2.  R-CP-2: Unambiguous Result Selection

   A mapping MUST identify the result unit being carried or assessed.
   It MUST preserve the context needed to distinguish task, scorer,
   metric, run attempt, aggregation, dataset/split, and population
   whenever these affect the claim.  A profile MUST specify which native
   identifiers or selectors supply that context and how their uniqueness
   is scoped.  Unsupported, unresolved, or ambiguous selections MUST NOT
   be resolved by taking an arbitrary first, last, largest, or most
   favorable result.

   A selector MUST be interpreted against the identified source snapshot
   and under an identified selector syntax.  When a summary combines
   results, the inputs and selection/aggregation rule MUST be
   identifiable.  When a referenced object changes, the old selector
   MUST NOT silently become a reference to new content.  A selector
   identifies data, not a measured population's completeness.  JSON
   Pointer [RFC6901] is one possible syntax, not a required wire
   mechanism.











Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


4.3.  R-CP-3: Execution, Observation, and Assessment

   A mapping MUST distinguish whether a measurement executed, what value
   or finding was reported, and whether an identified criterion was
   assessed.  It MUST NOT translate successful process completion into a
   successful metric or safety assessment.  Non-execution, invalidation,
   error, inconclusive outcome, and absence of evidence MUST NOT
   silently become a measured pass.  They also MUST NOT be relabeled as
   a measured failure unless the source semantics actually establish
   such a failure.

   A score without an established criterion MUST remain a score without
   an attributed source verdict.  "The source states that no criterion
   was applied" and "the available source does not establish a
   criterion" MUST remain distinguishable.  An omitted field alone
   establishes neither condition unless the identified native format
   defines that omission unambiguously.  A non-applicability assertion
   MUST retain its stated scope and basis, not be invented from a
   missing value.

4.4.  R-CP-4: Values, Units, and Numerical Transformations

   For a selected result, a mapping MUST preserve the meaning of its
   value, including applicable units, scale, metric definition,
   comparator direction, precision, and uncertainty information.  A
   profile MUST specify acceptable numerical conversions and any
   tolerance.  It MUST distinguish a source uncertainty estimate from
   information lost through conversion.  Missing uncertainty information
   MUST NOT be mapped to zero uncertainty or to a source claim of
   statistical confidence.  An exact integer identifier MUST NOT be
   changed by a lossy numeric representation.

   Rounding, normalization, aggregation, or recomputation MUST be
   identified as a derivation when it can affect interpretation.  A
   consumer MUST NOT use a rounded presentation value to claim that the
   source met a threshold when the unrounded source did not.  If the
   native representation cannot support the requested numerical
   comparison, that comparison MUST remain unestablished.  A profile MAY
   permit a bounded conversion for a narrower claim; the bound and the
   affected claim MUST be explicit.











Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


4.5.  R-CP-5: Criteria, New Judgments, and Chronology

   A transported criterion assessment MUST identify the criterion and
   revision actually attributed to its source.  A consumer MAY apply a
   new criterion or policy to a source observation, provided it records
   a separate assessment with its own actor, inputs, rule/version,
   scope, and result.  It MUST NOT describe this new judgment as the
   original evaluator's verdict or as a criterion fixed before the
   source run without supporting evidence.

   A claim that criteria preceded execution MUST have a supported
   ordering relationship between the identified criteria and that run.
   A bare timestamp string, matching identifiers, or a hash-only
   commitment is not sufficient by itself.  Existing preregistration
   mechanisms can be referenced; this document defines none.  Unknown
   ordering MUST remain unknown.  Legitimate corrections and later
   reassessments are permitted but MUST preserve the original assessment
   and explicit revision relationship.

4.6.  R-CP-6: Coverage, Aggregation, and Attempts

   A claim about an evaluation campaign or complete population MUST
   identify the population or reproducible inclusion rule, its source,
   and the accounting method.  Recorded samples, unexecuted samples,
   errors, exclusions, invalidations, and unknown portions MUST NOT
   disappear solely because an aggregate counts only successful records.
   When totals or categories are unknown, a mapping MUST record that
   limitation rather than invent counts.

   The profile MUST define how retries, repeated measurements, duplicate
   records, changed sample sets, and overlapping outcomes affect the
   denominator.  It MUST NOT assume that native status categories are
   disjoint when they are not.  A partial run MAY preserve a local
   criterion result; that result MUST retain its narrower scope.
   Preserving all supplied records does not establish that all actual
   attempts were supplied.  Selection or deduplication that changes the
   population MUST be visible as a transformation.

4.7.  R-CP-7: Qualified Identity and Evaluation Context

   A mapping MUST distinguish display names and declarations from
   identities established by a specified verification procedure.  When a
   conclusion requires an exact model, checkpoint, configuration,
   dataset, harness, or environment, the profile MUST identify the
   evidence required for that conclusion.  Missing required identity
   evidence MUST prevent that conclusion, but need not prevent carrying
   a more limited declared result.




Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   Context material to the selected claim, such as tool access, network
   restrictions, safeguard state, scoring method, or system
   configuration, MUST retain its source and verification status.  A
   declared container digest or model hash MUST NOT be presented as
   proof that those bytes executed.  Attestation references MUST retain
   the scope and accepting verification basis of the attestation.
   Evaluator access and independence declarations MUST NOT be promoted
   to established access or independence merely through conversion.

4.8.  R-CP-8: Evidence Availability and Digest Knowledge

   A mapping MUST distinguish evidence availability from digest
   knowledge.  It MUST distinguish a digest recomputed from available
   bytes by an identified actor, a digest reported by another source but
   not recomputed by that actor, and a digest that is unavailable.  It
   MUST NOT fabricate a digest or use a dummy value to make an
   unavailable object appear content-bound.

   Availability statements MUST be scoped to an actor and the relevant
   observation or exchange context.  Public location, permission to
   access, successful retrieval, and retention are different properties.
   A profile MUST define how known restrictions and unknown availability
   are represented.  It MUST NOT invent a custodian, withholding reason,
   or claim that an object exists.  When the destination cannot express
   a required unavailable state, the mapper MUST provide a bound,
   interpretable qualification through the profile or report that the
   affected mapping is unsupported.

4.9.  R-CP-9: Loss, Conflict, and Multi-Hop Preservation

   The mapping report MUST distinguish copied assertions,
   transformations, out-of-band declarations, and material losses.  A
   profile MUST identify which source qualifications are required for
   each supported claim class.  A converter MUST NOT omit a known
   material qualification merely by declaring it irrelevant.  Unknown
   extensions that may qualify the selected claim MUST remain
   uninterpreted or prevent that claim from being established; a profile
   MAY define an explicit criticality mechanism or extension points
   whose contents cannot qualify its stated claim class under that
   profile.

   Every transformation hop used to support an end-to-end preservation
   claim MUST be accounted for, either through the chain of mapping
   records or by a direct check against an adequately identified earlier
   source.  A later converter MUST NOT erase an earlier material loss or
   present reintroduced information as though it had survived the lost
   hop.  Corrections, contradictory records, alternative
   interpretations, and amendments MUST retain provenance.  A signed



Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   loss report is itself an assertion; it does not prove that its loss
   inventory is complete.  A contradictory source verdict may be
   retained as an attributed assertion, but MUST NOT be endorsed merely
   because it was copied faithfully.

4.10.  R-CP-10: Typed Verification and Bounded Consumption

   A verification result MUST identify the actor, procedure/version,
   checked inputs, verification type, result, and material limitations.
   Structural validation, digest recomputation, signature verification,
   attestation appraisal, mapping verification, and substantive
   evaluation judgments MUST remain distinct.  Successful verification
   of a carrier MUST NOT imply successful verification of an unsupported
   profile, unavailable source, or source statement not covered by that
   carrier.

   A consumer MUST evaluate preservation relative to the selected claim
   and accepted verification basis.  If an essential binding,
   interpretation, qualification, or verification input is unavailable,
   it MUST NOT report that claim as established.  It MAY retain or
   forward an opaque record without accepting its semantics.  A local
   policy may deny, defer, request evidence, or otherwise act on
   uncertainty, but the resulting action MUST NOT rewrite uncertainty as
   a measured source failure or success.

4.11.  R-CP-11: Separate Reliance and Downstream Decisions

   An exporter completing a conversion MUST NOT, on that basis alone,
   assert that a governance decision occurred.  When a reliance record
   is supplied, it MUST identify the asserting actor, actual reported
   decision, applicable policy basis, affected subject, and selected
   evaluation inputs.  A new judgment under Section 4.5 MUST remain
   separate from the transported source assertions.

   The consumer MUST NOT infer valid decision authority, complete
   deliberation, causal influence, control delivery, enforcement, or
   observed effect solely from a reliance record.  Authentication of its
   author is a separate check.  Changes to evidence or policy MUST
   produce a distinguishable reassessment or amendment, not
   retroactively rewrite the evidentiary basis of an earlier decision.
   Existing decision and control mechanisms should carry any actual
   downstream records; this document defines no such protocol.









Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


4.12.  R-CP-12: Versioned Mappings and Verification Evidence

   A concrete profile MUST identify the source and destination versions
   and semantic rules it supports, including its extension and unknown-
   value policy.  An implementation MUST NOT silently treat a new or
   incompatible basis as the old one.  A profile MUST specify observable
   expected behavior for negative and ambiguous cases, including cases
   where a limited result can be preserved but a stronger claim cannot.

   Implementation reports MUST identify the profile and implementation
   versions, source cases, procedure, and observed results on which
   their claims rely.  A schema check or a documentation crosswalk MUST
   NOT be described as a complete semantic mapping test.  Same-author
   tests MUST NOT be described as independent interoperability.  An
   interoperability claim MUST name the tested producer and consumer,
   exact bases, inputs, procedure, outcomes, and known limitations.

5.  What a Concrete Mapping Profile Must Specify

   A mapping profile can use native fields, an existing evidence
   predicate, or a sidecar manifest.  This document does not allocate an
   identifier or prescribe a new envelope.  A sidecar used to qualify an
   output MUST be bound to that output and its source selection under
   the accepted integrity and attribution mechanism; an unrelated
   explanatory file is not sufficient.

   *  The source and destination interpretation bases; claim classes
      supported; and how a result unit is selected without ambiguity.

   *  The preservation rules for execution, observation, criteria,
      values, population scope, identity, and uncertainty, including
      explicit unsupported cases.

   *  The representation and protection of mapping provenance, material
      loss, conflicts, access limitations, and digest knowledge.

   *  The trust, authentication, freshness, retrieval, and resource-
      limit rules required for its claims, with unknown and failed
      states distinguished.

   *  The consumer-visible outcomes and reproducible examples against
      which mapping and consumption are tested.









Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   The profile MUST describe how each applicable requirement in
   Section 4 is satisfied and why a conditional requirement is
   inapplicable when it is not used.  It need not require every possible
   identity or metadata field for every claim.  However, reducing
   metadata cannot be used to preserve the name of a stronger claim
   while discarding the conditions needed to support it.

   A loss statement need not enumerate every field outside the chosen
   claim set.  It needs to identify which material information was not
   preserved and which claims consequently remain unsupported.
   Retention or disclosure of confidential source content is not
   required when a bounded commitment, restricted reference, or explicit
   unavailable state suffices for the narrower claim.

6.  Consumer Processing

   The following procedure summarizes the requirements.  It is not a new
   verification algorithm or mandatory wire-state vocabulary.  An
   implementation MAY combine steps if the same distinctions remain
   observable.

   1.  Select the requested claim and supported mapping profile.  Bound
       parsing, retrieval, and decompression before processing untrusted
       content.

   2.  Identify the source snapshot and result unit.  Check that
       selectors, references, and content/projection bindings are
       unambiguous and apply to those exact inputs.

   3.  Perform the required integrity, attribution, freshness, and other
       checks under the consumer's accepted basis.  Do not use a
       statement's own declaration as a substitute for that basis.

   4.  Check that source status, values, criteria, coverage, identity
       qualifications, and material limitations were preserved or
       explicitly transformed under the profile.  Consider previous hops
       or recheck against the source.

   5.  Report separately: which preservation checks succeeded, which
       found violations, and which could not be established.  Preserve
       reasons when more than one condition applies; a summary label
       must not hide a failure or unknown prerequisite.

   6.  Only then use the supported result as an input to a separately
       identified assessment or decision, if any.  Retain the original
       source assertions and the separate basis of the new judgment.





Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   These outcomes concern a bounded preservation check.  A demonstrated
   mapping violation is not proof that the model failed a benchmark.
   Failure to establish preservation is not a proof that a source
   assertion is false.  Conversely, success in every mapping check does
   not validate the benchmark, source honesty, or deployment safety.

7.  Worked Counterexamples

   All examples in this section are synthetic.  Field names outside the
   explicitly described native-style fragments are explanatory notation,
   not a wire schema, registered vocabulary, full native log, or
   released AIREP profile.  No model was run to produce these values.
   The examples illustrate required distinctions; they neither
   demonstrate upstream implementation defects nor establish
   interoperability.

7.1.  Run Completion Is Not a Scoring Verdict

   Inspect documents run status and scoring results separately
   [INSPECT].  The following synthetic excerpt uses those concepts.  It
   is not a complete EvalLog.  The run finished successfully; the
   accuracy observation is 0.734.  The excerpt supplies no criterion, so
   it does not establish whether the full evaluation had one.

   {
     "status": "success",
     "results": {
       "scores": [
         {
           "name": "example_scorer",
           "metrics": {
             "accuracy": {
               "value": 0.734
             }
           }
         }
       ]
     }
   }

                 Figure 2: Synthetic Inspect-Style Excerpt

   An output that attributes PASS to the evaluator solely from status =
   success violates Section 4.3.  A limited view can preserve the
   reported completion status and selected score while leaving the
   criterion state unknown.  Explicit source evidence that no criterion
   was applied would instead support that narrower absence assertion.




Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   A consumer can apply its own threshold.  The following explanatory
   record reports a new local assessment; it does not invent a
   historical source verdict.  The source object reference is an
   illustrative identifier scoped to this example, not a substitute for
   the binding required by a deployed profile.

   {
     "actor": "consumer.example",
     "source_selection": {
       "object": "example-inspect-fragment",
       "syntax": "RFC6901",
       "pointer": "/results/scores/0/metrics/accuracy/value"
     },
     "source_criterion_state": "unknown",
     "new_criterion": {
       "id": "local-accuracy-policy-v1",
       "operator": ">=",
       "threshold": 0.7
     },
     "new_assessment": "PASS",
     "criterion_preceded_source_run": "not-established"
   }

             Figure 3: A Separately Attributed Local Assessment

   This new assessment is allowed by Section 4.5.  Its authority and
   suitability for a real decision remain separate questions.  A later
   evidence view must not remove the attribution and turn it into "the
   evaluation passed its preregistered test".

7.2.  A Run Identifier Does Not Select a Metric

   LightEval describes a task-keyed results object with numerical
   metrics [LIGHTEVAL].  The following is a synthetic excerpt, using a
   fictional task name and an added explanatory run identifier.  The
   values are not a real LightEval run.















Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   {
     "example_run_id": "run-17",
     "results": {
       "example/task|0": {
         "em": 0.62,
         "maj@8": 0.8
       }
     },
     "versions": {
       "example/task|0": 1
     }
   }

                  Figure 4: Synthetic Task-Indexed Results

   Under JSON Pointer [RFC6901], /results/example~1task|0/em selects
   0.62; /results/example~1task|0/maj@8 selects 0.8.  These are
   different result units.  A record saying only "run-17 passed 0.75"
   fails to specify the metric or the assessment rule.  The slash in the
   task key is escaped as ~1 in the pointer.  This example uses a JSON
   Pointer string, not an assumed URI-fragment convention for
   application/json.

   A deployed mapping must additionally bind the source snapshot, native
   task/scoring interpretation, and population needed for its claim.  A
   JSON pointer into a mutable URL does not satisfy those requirements.
   A pointer to a numerical value also does not carry the surrounding
   context on its own.

7.3.  Local Success and Incomplete Coverage

   {
     "population": {
       "source": "declared-plan-v1",
       "planned_samples": 100
     },
     "completed_samples": 80,
     "sample_criterion_met": 76,
     "sample_criterion_not_met": 4,
     "not_run_samples": 20,
     "derived_fraction_among_completed": 0.95
   }

               Figure 5: Synthetic Bounded Sample Accounting

   Here the sample categories are defined by the example to be disjoint.
   The observed fraction is 76/80, not evidence that 95 of 100 planned
   samples met the criterion.  A new policy could accept incomplete



Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   coverage, but it must identify that choice separately.  If the plan
   were unavailable, the record could not infer a total of 100.  If
   attempts rather than unique samples were counted, the deduplication
   and retry rules would have to be stated.  Even a verified plan does
   not establish that an operator disclosed all real attempts.

7.4.  Rounding Can Change a Decision

   {
     "source_decimal": "0.94996",
     "display_decimal": "0.950",
     "criterion": {
       "operator": ">=",
       "threshold_decimal": "0.95"
     },
     "comparison_on_source": "FAIL",
     "comparison_on_display": "PASS"
   }

                   Figure 6: Synthetic Decimal Comparison

   The strings in this example denote exact base-10 values.  Rounding to
   three fractional places changes the result of the stated comparison.
   Displaying 0.950 can be useful, but treating it as the original
   evidence for a 0.95 threshold violates Section 4.4.  A new assessment
   deliberately using rounded values would require its own explicit rule
   and attribution; it cannot replace the earlier comparison silently.

7.5.  A Restricted Reference Is Not Verified Bytes

   {
     "object_ref": "https://evaluator.example/private/run-17.log",
     "availability_to": "publisher.example",
     "availability_context": "this conversion",
     "availability": "not-retrieved",
     "digest_knowledge": "unavailable",
     "reason": "source supplied a restricted reference only",
     "object_existence_basis": "source assertion only"
   }

            Figure 7: Synthetic Unavailable Evidence Description










Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   The publisher can preserve the reference and its limitation.  It
   cannot supply a made-up all-zero hash, claim a recomputed digest,
   infer the log's contents, or conclude that the source actually
   retained a complete log.  Whether another actor can retrieve the
   object is a separate observation.  A destination requiring a known
   digest needs a supported qualification mechanism or must report the
   affected object as unsupported, not counterfeit compliance.

7.6.  Later Authentication Does Not Repair Earlier Loss

   Suppose an initial mapper receives the partial-population record in
   Section 7.3 and exports only 0.95.  A second mapper signs that score
   and reports "complete evaluation passed".  The signature may
   authenticate the second mapper, but it neither recovers the missing
   population nor authenticates the first operator's actions.  A
   consumer without adequate upstream evidence cannot establish that
   stronger claim.

   A direct recheck against the identified original can restore the
   missing context for a new derived view.  The new view must identify
   that recheck, rather than assert that the context survived the
   earlier mapping.  If a corrected source result later appears, it must
   be distinguished from the source snapshot used in the original
   decision.

8.  Relationship to Existing Work

   The following are reuse boundaries, not assertions of field-for-field
   compatibility or adopted working-group scope.  Referenced Internet-
   Drafts are works in progress.  None of the examples implements a
   binding to all of these mechanisms.

8.1.  Attestation and Transparency

   RATS [RFC9334] supplies attestation roles, evidence appraisal, and
   relying-party decisions.  This document does not change those roles
   or claim that a behavioral evaluation result is equivalent to
   platform attestation.  It addresses preservation of the assertions
   passed between applications, including the limits of any attestation
   reference they carry.

   SCITT [RFC9943] supplies signed-statement transparency and receipts.
   Composite Evidence Verification [SCITT-COMPOSITE] addresses
   statements and relationships assessed under a verification profile.
   These mechanisms can protect and relate mapping records.  A receipt
   or verified graph does not, by itself, establish that a converter
   faithfully interpreted an AI metric.  This document neither extends
   SCITT's core payload semantics nor defines a new graph envelope.



Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


8.2.  Criteria and Evidence Qualification

   PRML [PRML] addresses registration of evaluation criteria and
   amendments, including limits of hash-only commitments.  A mapping can
   reference that work when carrying criteria provenance.  It must still
   preserve whether the particular run is evidenced to have followed
   registration.  This document defines no competing preregistration
   scheme.

   Evidence Qualification Receipts [EQR] distinguish evidence
   qualification from authorization and include representation-
   compatibility requirements.  This document does not claim those
   principles as new.  Its narrower application is to native AI
   evaluation outputs: distinguishing run state from scoring, selecting
   the exact metric and population, and retaining qualifications when
   those results are converted.  No EQR field mapping or equivalence is
   asserted.

8.3.  Provenance and Existing Evidence Formats

   The in-toto Statement [IN-TOTO] provides digest-bound subjects and
   typed predicates.  A concrete mapping profile could use such a
   predicate or another existing extension point rather than inventing
   an envelope.  SLSA's retired Verification Summary Attestation
   [SLSA-VSA] is historical related work for relating a verifier,
   policy, inputs, subject, and result; it is not recommended here as an
   active dependency.

   AIREP's experimental Embedded Evaluation Profile 0.1 [AIREP-PROFILE]
   already carries evaluation context, explicit measurement states,
   evidence references, and claim boundaries.  It is an informative
   example, not a normative dependency or an implementation claim for
   this document.  The author also develops AIREP.  These requirements
   do not silently revise its frozen profile basis or grant any AIREP
   assurance class.

8.4.  Control Delivery Is a Separate Boundary

   Section 5.16 (R-CD-16) of [CONTROL-EVIDENCE] already addresses
   semantic preservation across agent control intermediaries.  This
   document specializes the problem for evaluation-result
   interpretation; it does not reproduce dispatch, receipt, enforcement,
   or observed-effect reconciliation.  Actual downstream control records
   can reference a real decision, but carrying evaluation evidence does
   not manufacture those events.






Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


9.  Security Considerations

   A conforming mapping can preserve a false, biased, manipulated, or
   selectively published source assertion.  A compromised source,
   converter, or verifier can sign false claims.  Claim preservation is
   not a substitute for source trust, independent observation, evaluator
   competence assessment, containment, or scientific review.  A loss
   report cannot independently prove that no omitted information
   existed.

   A deployed profile MUST specify the integrity and attribution
   bindings required for its claims, including which actor authenticated
   which object.  An authenticated channel can protect a transfer while
   leaving later re-export attribution unresolved.  When offline third-
   party verification is claimed, the profile MUST provide evidence
   sufficient for that verification rather than relying only on an
   earlier channel session.  Signature validity under an unaccepted or
   self-declared key is not accepted source attribution.

   Source and mapping substitution, replay, and equivocation can make a
   genuine result appear to concern another model, policy, population,
   or time.  Consumers need binding and freshness checks appropriate to
   the requested claim.  A recent signature over an old evaluation does
   not make the evaluation recent.  Append-only history does not by
   itself prove all real evaluations were logged.  Revocation or a
   changed trust basis may alter a verification conclusion without
   authorizing silent rewriting of historical records.

   Implementations MUST apply bounded resource limits to parsing,
   archive expansion, reference traversal, and evidence graphs.  A
   profile using JSON needs deterministic handling of duplicate names,
   excessive nesting, large numbers, and invalid encodings; ambiguity in
   claim-relevant data MUST NOT be resolved by accidental parser
   behavior.  The interoperability cautions in [RFC8259] are relevant.
   A structural validator does not necessarily perform numerical,
   chronological, or semantic consistency checks.

   An evidence reference is not permission to fetch or execute its
   target.  Consumers MUST apply an explicit retrieval policy, including
   access control and restrictions on destinations, redirects, schemes,
   and content processing.  Evaluation logs, prompts, and tool outputs
   are untrusted data, even when embedded in a valid signed record.
   Instructions in them MUST NOT be executed as verifier instructions
   merely because they appear in evidence.







Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   A display layer can undo preservation performed by the converter.
   Interfaces that collapse "not checked", "unavailable", "invalid", and
   "passed" into the same indicator can mislead a decision maker.  A
   profile MUST preserve the distinction at the consumer interface for
   the claims it supports, not only in an inaccessible raw attachment.

10.  Privacy Considerations

   Evaluation evidence may include personal data, credentials,
   proprietary configurations, restricted test items, or information
   useful for misuse.  A mapping SHOULD minimize transferred content to
   what is needed for the selected claim.  Restrictions and redactions
   MUST remain visible when material; they need not reveal the
   restricted content itself.

   Content hashes are not anonymization.  Low-entropy values can be
   guessed; stable digests and identifiers can correlate runs,
   operators, and sensitive activity.  Profiles should select existing
   confidentiality, access-control, or commitment mechanisms appropriate
   to their threat model.  This document specifies no confidentiality-
   preserving proof system and does not require publication of
   confidential benchmark contents.

   References can expire, access can change, and retention obligations
   may require deletion.  A preserved reference should not be described
   as perpetual availability.  A later consumer that lacks material
   evidence MUST record its actual verification limit, not rely on a
   publisher's earlier access statement as proof that the bytes were
   checked by that consumer.

11.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.  It creates no registry, media
   type, URI scheme, namespace, or wire-level status code.  Identifiers
   and JSON member names in examples are illustrative only.

12.  Implementation and Validation Status

   This revision specifies requirements and illustrative processing
   behavior, not a complete mapping profile.  It claims no deployed
   implementation, independent implementation, interoperability result,
   real-model evaluation, or proof of arbitrary semantic preservation.
   The examples and test scenarios are synthetic explanatory material,
   not measurements of frontier-model safety.

   Existing AIREP profile tooling is related work, not automatically an
   implementation of this document.  Parsing an example, checking
   arithmetic, or validating an existing schema does not establish



Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   compliance with all of these requirements.  An implementation report
   needs the versioned mappings and consumer behavior required by
   Section 4.12.

13.  Further Specification Work

   The next engineering question is whether concrete mappings using
   existing native formats and evidence predicates can satisfy these
   requirements without a new carrier.  Useful work includes version-
   pinned Inspect and LightEval mappings, explicit treatment of score-
   only and partial-run cases, and independent consumer checks.  A
   mapping profile must resolve claim-dependent materiality and source
   ambiguity rather than hide them in a generic success flag.

   Whether these requirements are best maintained as an independent
   application profile or incorporated into related work remains open.
   This document makes no claim about working-group adoption.  Its scope
   is evidence interpretation at exchange boundaries, not selection of
   benchmarks or policy outcomes.

14.  References

14.1.  Normative References

   [BCP14]    Best Current Practice 14,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>.
              At the time of writing, this BCP comprises the following:

              Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

              Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

14.2.  Informative References

   [AIREP-PROFILE]
              Abak, A. T., "AIREP Embedded Evaluation Profile v0.1",
              Experimental companion profile; AIREP carrier 0.2. Source
              commit 9c1154ffd15781782e8b77242d05b6da87d240f7. Accessed
              22 September 2026., <https://github.com/halvrenofviryel/
              ai-runtime-evidence-
              protocol/blob/9c1154ffd15781782e8b77242d05b6da87d240f7/spec/airep/
              v0.2/profiles/embedded-evaluation/README.md>.




Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   [CONTROL-EVIDENCE]
              Abak, A. T., "Evidence Requirements for Agent Control
              Delivery and Outcome Reconciliation", Work in Progress.
              Individual submission; in particular, Section 5.16, R-CD-
              16., Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-abak-agent-
              control-delivery-evidence-01, 4 September 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-abak-agent-
              control-delivery-evidence-01>.

   [EQR]      Watts, D., "Evidence-Bounded Authorization for Agentic
              Systems: Evidence Qualification Receipts", Work in
              Progress. Individual submission., Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-watts-agent-evidence-boundary-00, 12
              September 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-watts-agent-evidence-boundary-00>.

   [IN-TOTO]  in-toto, "in-toto Attestation Framework: Statement",
              Statement v1 documentation, accessed 22 September 2026.
              The linked branch can change., <https://github.com/in-
              toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/v1/statement.md>.

   [INSPECT]  Inspect, "Log Files", Online documentation, accessed 22
              September 2026. Not a pinned implementation revision.,
              <https://inspect.aisi.org.uk/eval-logs.html>.

   [LIGHTEVAL]
              Hugging Face, "Saving and Reading Results", LightEval
              documentation, accessed 22 September 2026. Not a pinned
              implementation revision.,
              <https://huggingface.co/docs/lighteval/saving-and-reading-
              results>.

   [PRML]     Ozturk, C., "A SCITT Profile for Pre-Run Evaluation
              Criteria (PRML)", Work in Progress. Individual
              submission., Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ozturk-scitt-prml-profile-00, 11 September 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ozturk-scitt-
              prml-profile-00>.

   [RFC6901]  Bryan, P., Zyp, K., and M. Nottingham, "JavaScript Object
              Notation (JSON) Pointer", RFC 6901, DOI 10.17487/RFC6901,
              April 2013, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6901>.

   [RFC8259]  Bray, T., "The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data
              Interchange Format", STD 90, RFC 8259,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8259, December 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8259>.




Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   [RFC9334]  Birkholz, H., Thaler, D., Richardson, M., Smith, N., and
              W. Pan, "Remote ATtestation procedureS (RATS)
              Architecture", RFC 9334, DOI 10.17487/RFC9334, January
              2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9334>.

   [RFC9943]  Birkholz, H., Delignat-Lavaud, A., Fournet, C., Deshpande,
              Y., and S. Lasker, "An Architecture for Trustworthy and
              Transparent Digital Supply Chains", RFC 9943,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9943, June 2026,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9943>.

   [SCITT-COMPOSITE]
              Aoki, N., "Composite Evidence Verification for SCITT
              Statement Graphs", Work in Progress. Individual
              submission., Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              nobuo-scitt-composite-evidence-verification-00, 7 July
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-nobuo-
              scitt-composite-evidence-verification-00>.

   [SLSA-VSA] SLSA, "Verification Summary Attestation", SLSA v1.1;
              status Retired. Historical related work, accessed 22
              September 2026.,
              <https://slsa.dev/spec/v1.1/verification_summary>.

Appendix A.  Mapping Test Scenarios

   These are proposed test obligations for concrete profiles, not a
   claimed executed conformance suite.  A profile needs actual source
   and destination fixtures, accepted interpretation bases, and
   observable consumer outputs.  An expected limitation can be the
   correct result; a test does not need to produce a pass verdict about
   a model.

   Each test report should state exactly which checks were performed.
   Native-format schema acceptance, arithmetic correctness, carrier
   verification, mapping correctness for selected cases, and independent
   interoperability are different claims.

A.1.  Run completes; score has no established criterion

   CP-T01 (Section 4.3): Preserve completion and score; do not attribute
   a criterion verdict to the source.

A.2.  Source explicitly declares no criterion; another source has an
      omitted unknown criterion

   CP-T02 (Section 4.3): Keep the two meanings distinct; do not infer
   explicit absence from omission alone.



Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


A.3.  Consumer applies a new threshold to a source score

   CP-T03 (Section 4.5): Permit a separately attributed new assessment
   with its inputs and rule; do not rewrite the source verdict or
   criterion chronology.

A.4.  Two metrics share one task and run identifier

   CP-T04 (Section 4.2): Require unambiguous result selection; reject
   arbitrary metric choice as support for the requested claim.

A.5.  Unexecuted, errored, or invalidated measurement

   CP-T05 (Section 4.3): Retain the native distinction; do not promote
   it to a measured pass or silently coerce it to a measured failure.

A.6.  Partial campaign has successful results in the observed subset

   CP-T06 (Section 4.6): Retain local outcomes and population limits; do
   not infer complete coverage.

A.7.  Retries and duplicate records change an apparent denominator

   CP-T07 (Section 4.6): Apply the declared attempt/aggregation rules
   and expose exclusions; do not count only favorable attempts silently.

A.8.  Rounding or a unit conversion crosses a threshold

   CP-T08 (Section 4.4): Preserve the source interpretation and explicit
   derivation; do not attribute the rounded comparison to the source.

A.9.  Only a model display name or declared network setting is available

   CP-T09 (Section 4.7): Preserve the declaration; leave actual executed
   identity or enforced isolation unestablished.

A.10.  Evidence reference is supplied without bytes or digest

   CP-T10 (Section 4.8): Report actual access and digest knowledge; no
   invented bytes, custodian, existence proof, or dummy digest.

A.11.  Digest is copied from an authenticated report

   CP-T11 (Section 4.8): Preserve reported digest and its source; do not
   call it recomputed by the consumer.






Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


A.12.  An earlier hop drops a material qualification

   CP-T12 (Section 4.9): Report the limit or recheck against adequate
   source evidence; a later signature does not repair the loss.

A.13.  Carrier verifies but semantic profile is unsupported

   CP-T13 (Section 4.10): Retain the carrier result; do not claim
   semantic preservation or successful model assessment.

A.14.  Export succeeds without any decision record

   CP-T14 (Section 4.11): Do not manufacture a release, pause,
   authorization, or control event.

A.15.  Criteria commitment exists but run ordering is not supported

   CP-T15 (Section 4.5): Preserve the commitment; do not infer that
   criteria preceded the run.

A.16.  A corrected result conflicts with an earlier result

   CP-T16 (Section 4.9): Preserve snapshots, attribution, and amendment
   relationship; do not rewrite the earlier decision basis.

A.17.  A new profile basis is supplied to an old consumer

   CP-T17 (Section 4.12): Expose unsupported semantics; do not silently
   reuse the old interpretation.

A.18.  A loss manifest is substituted between two conversions

   CP-T18 (Section 4.1): Require binding to the actual source selection
   and output; do not rely on an unrelated qualification.

A.19.  Duplicate JSON keys or ambiguous selection affect a score

   CP-T19 (Section 4.2): Handle under deterministic profile rules;
   parser accident must not establish the claim.

A.20.  Two consumers accept the same source but apply different policies

   CP-T20 (Section 4.10): Preserve the common source assertion and both
   distinct judgments; disagreement is not repaired by overwriting a
   result.

Author's Address




Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft      AI Evaluation Claim Preservation      September 2026


   Ali Toygar Abak
   Independent Researcher
   Email: founder@phionyx.ai
   URI:   https://phionyx.ai















































Abak                      Expires 27 March 2027                [Page 28]
